Second Narrative

Contributed by MATHEW BRUFF, Solicitor, of Gray’s Inn Square

### Chapter I

My fair friend, Miss Clack, having laid down the pen, there are two
reasons for my taking it up next, in my turn.

In the first place, I am in a position to throw the necessary light on
certain points of interest which have thus far been left in the dark.
Miss Verinder had her own private reason for breaking her marriage
engagement–and I was at the bottom of it. Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite had his
own private reason for withdrawing all claim to the hand of his charming
cousin–and I discovered what it was.

In the second place, it was my good or ill fortune, I hardly know which,
to find myself personally involved–at the period of which I am now
writing–in the mystery of the Indian Diamond. I had the honour of an
interview, at my own office, with an Oriental stranger of distinguished
manners, who was no other, unquestionably, than the chief of the three
Indians. Add to this, that I met with the celebrated traveller,
Mr. Murthwaite, the day afterwards, and that I held a conversation with
him on the subject of the Moonstone, which has a very important bearing
on later events. And there you have the statement of my claims to fill
the position which I occupy in these pages.

The true story of the broken marriage engagement comes first in point of
time, and must therefore take the first place in the present narrative.
Tracing my way back along the chain of events, from one end to the
other, I find it necessary to open the scene, oddly enough as you will
think, at the bedside of my excellent client and friend, the late Sir
John Verinder.

Sir John had his share–perhaps rather a large share–of the more harmless
and amiable of the weaknesses incidental to humanity. Among these, I may
mention as applicable to the matter in hand, an invincible reluctance–so
long as he enjoyed his usual good health–to face the responsibility of
making his will. Lady Verinder exerted her influence to rouse him to a
sense of duty in this matter; and I exerted my influence. He admitted
the justice of our views–but he went no further than that, until he
found himself afflicted with the illness which ultimately brought him to
his grave. Then, I was sent for at last, to take my client’s
instructions on the subject of his will. They proved to be the simplest
instructions I had ever received in the whole of my professional career.

Sir John was dozing, when I entered the room. He roused himself at the
sight of me.

“How do you do, Mr. Bruff?” he said. “I sha’n’t be very long about this.
And then I’ll go to sleep again.” He looked on with great interest while
I collected pens, ink, and paper. “Are you ready?” he asked. I bowed and
took a dip of ink, and waited for my instructions.

“I leave everything to my wife,” said Sir John. “That’s all.” He turned
round on his pillow, and composed himself to sleep again.

I was obliged to disturb him.

“Am I to understand,” I asked, “that you leave the whole of the
property, of every sort and description, of which you die possessed,
absolutely to Lady Verinder?”

“Yes,” said Sir John. “Only, I put it shorter. Why can’t you put it
shorter, and let me go to sleep again? Everything to my wife. That’s my
Will.”

His property was entirely at his own disposal, and was of two kinds.
Property in land (I purposely abstain from using technical language),
and property in money. In the majority of cases, I am afraid I should
have felt it my duty to my client to ask him to reconsider his Will. In
the case of Sir John, I knew Lady Verinder to be, not only worthy of the
unreserved trust which her husband had placed in her (all good wives are
worthy of that)–but to be also capable of properly administering a trust
(which, in my experience of the fair sex, not one in a thousand of them
is competent to do). In ten minutes, Sir John’s Will was drawn, and
executed, and Sir John himself, good man, was finishing his interrupted
nap.

Lady Verinder amply justified the confidence which her husband had
placed in her. In the first days of her widowhood, she sent for me, and
made her Will. The view she took of her position was so thoroughly sound
and sensible, that I was relieved of all necessity for advising her. My
responsibility began and ended with shaping her instructions into the
proper legal form. Before Sir John had been a fortnight in his grave,
the future of his daughter had been most wisely and most affectionately
provided for.

The Will remained in its fireproof box at my office, through more years
than I like to reckon up. It was not till the summer of eighteen hundred
and forty-eight that I found occasion to look at it again under very
melancholy circumstances.

At the date I have mentioned, the doctors pronounced the sentence on
poor Lady Verinder, which was literally a sentence of death. I was the
first person whom she informed of her situation; and I found her anxious
to go over her Will again with me.

It was impossible to improve the provisions relating to her daughter.
But, in the lapse of time, her wishes in regard to certain minor
legacies, left to different relatives, had undergone some modification;
and it became necessary to add three or four Codicils to the original
document. Having done this at once, for fear of accident, I obtained her
ladyship’s permission to embody her recent instructions in a second
Will. My object was to avoid certain inevitable confusions and
repetitions which now disfigured the original document, and which, to
own the truth, grated sadly on my professional sense of the fitness of
things.

The execution of this second Will has been described by Miss Clack, who
was so obliging as to witness it. So far as regarded Rachel Verinder’s
pecuniary interests, it was, word for word, the exact counterpart of the
first Will. The only changes introduced related to the appointment of a
guardian, and to certain provisions concerning that appointment, which
were made under my advice. On Lady Verinder’s death, the Will was placed
in the hands of my proctor to be “proved” (as the phrase is) in the
usual way.

In about three weeks from that time–as well as I can remember–the first
warning reached me of something unusual going on under the surface. I
happened to be looking in at my friend the proctor’s office, and I
observed that he received me with an appearance of greater interest than
usual.

“I have some news for you,” he said. “What do you think I heard at
Doctors’ Commons this morning? Lady Verinder’s Will has been asked for,
and examined, already!”

This was news indeed! There was absolutely nothing which could be
contested in the Will; and there was nobody I could think of who had the
slightest interest in examining it. (I shall perhaps do well if I
explain in this place, for the benefit of the few people who don’t know
it already, that the law allows all Wills to be examined at Doctors’
Commons by anybody who applies, on the payment of a shilling fee.)

“Did you hear who asked for the Will?” I asked.

“Yes; the clerk had no hesitation in telling ME. Mr. Smalley, of the
firm of Skipp and Smalley, asked for it. The Will has not been copied
yet into the great Folio Registers. So there was no alternative but to
depart from the usual course, and to let him see the original document.
He looked it over carefully, and made a note in his pocket-book. Have
you any idea of what he wanted with it?”

I shook my head. “I shall find out,” I answered, “before I am a day
older.” With that I went back at once to my own office.

If any other firm of solicitors had been concerned in this unaccountable
examination of my deceased client’s Will, I might have found some
difficulty in making the necessary discovery. But I had a hold over
Skipp and Smalley which made my course in this matter a comparatively
easy one. My common-law clerk (a most competent and excellent man) was a
brother of Mr. Smalley’s; and, owing to this sort of indirect connection
with me, Skipp and Smalley had, for some years past, picked up the
crumbs that fell from my table, in the shape of cases brought to my
office, which, for various reasons, I did not think it worth while to
undertake. My professional patronage was, in this way, of some
importance to the firm. I intended, if necessary, to remind them of that
patronage, on the present occasion.

The moment I got back I spoke to my clerk; and, after telling him what
had happened, I sent him to his brother’s office, “with Mr. Bruff’s
compliments, and he would be glad to know why Messrs. Skipp and Smalley
had found it necessary to examine Lady Verinder’s will.”

This message brought Mr. Smalley back to my office in company with his
brother. He acknowledged that he had acted under instructions received
from a client. And then he put it to me, whether it would not be a
breach of professional confidence on his part to say more.

We had a smart discussion upon that. He was right, no doubt; and I was
wrong. The truth is, I was angry and suspicious–and I insisted on
knowing more. Worse still, I declined to consider any additional
information offered me, as a secret placed in my keeping: I claimed
perfect freedom to use my own discretion. Worse even than that, I took
an unwarrantable advantage of my position. “Choose, sir,” I said to
Mr. Smalley, “between the risk of losing your client’s business and the
risk of losing Mine.” Quite indefensible, I admit–an act of tyranny, and
nothing less. Like other tyrants, I carried my point. Mr. Smalley chose
his alternative, without a moment’s hesitation.

He smiled resignedly, and gave up the name of his client:

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

That was enough for me–I wanted to know no more.

Having reached this point in my narrative, it now becomes necessary to
place the reader of these lines–so far as Lady Verinder’s Will is
concerned–on a footing of perfect equality, in respect of information,
with myself.

Let me state, then, in the fewest possible words, that Rachel Verinder
had nothing but a life-interest in the property. Her mother’s excellent
sense, and my long experience, had combined to relieve her of all
responsibility, and to guard her from all danger of becoming the victim
in the future of some needy and unscrupulous man. Neither she, nor her
husband (if she married), could raise sixpence, either on the property
in land, or on the property in money. They would have the houses in
London and in Yorkshire to live in, and they would have the handsome
income–and that was all.

When I came to think over what I had discovered, I was sorely perplexed
what to do next.

Hardly a week had passed since I had heard (to my surprise and distress)
of Miss Verinder’s proposed marriage. I had the sincerest admiration and
affection for her; and I had been inexpressibly grieved when I heard
that she was about to throw herself away on Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. And
now, here was the man–whom I had always believed to be a smooth-tongued
impostor–justifying the very worst that I had thought of him, and
plainly revealing the mercenary object of the marriage, on his side!
And what of that?–you may reply–the thing is done every day. Granted, my
dear sir. But would you think of it quite as lightly as you do, if the
thing was done (let us say) with your own sister?

The first consideration which now naturally occurred to me was this.
Would Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite hold to his engagement, after what his
lawyer had discovered for him?

It depended entirely on his pecuniary position, of which I knew nothing.
If that position was not a desperate one, it would be well worth his
while to marry Miss Verinder for her income alone. If, on the other
hand, he stood in urgent need of realising a large sum by a given time,
then Lady Verinder’s Will would exactly meet the case, and would
preserve her daughter from falling into a scoundrel’s hands.

In the latter event, there would be no need for me to distress Miss
Rachel, in the first days of her mourning for her mother, by an
immediate revelation of the truth. In the former event, if I remained
silent, I should be conniving at a marriage which would make her
miserable for life.

My doubts ended in my calling at the hotel in London, at which I knew
Mrs. Ablewhite and Miss Verinder to be staying. They informed me that
they were going to Brighton the next day, and that an unexpected
obstacle prevented Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite from accompanying them. I at
once proposed to take his place. While I was only thinking of Rachel
Verinder, it was possible to hesitate. When I actually saw her, my mind
was made up directly, come what might of it, to tell her the truth.

I found my opportunity, when I was out walking with her, on the day
after my arrival.

“May I speak to you,” I asked, “about your marriage engagement?”

“Yes,” she said, indifferently, “if you have nothing more interesting to
talk about.”

“Will you forgive an old friend and servant of your family, Miss Rachel,
if I venture on asking whether your heart is set on this marriage?”

“I am marrying in despair, Mr. Bruff–on the chance of dropping into some
sort of stagnant happiness which may reconcile me to my life.”

Strong language! and suggestive of something below the surface, in the
shape of a romance. But I had my own object in view, and I declined (as
we lawyers say) to pursue the question into its side issues.

“Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite can hardly be of your way of thinking,” I said.
“HIS heart must be set on the marriage at any rate?”

“He says so, and I suppose I ought to believe him. He would hardly marry
me, after what I have owned to him, unless he was fond of me.”

Poor thing! the bare idea of a man marrying her for his own selfish and
mercenary ends had never entered her head. The task I had set myself
began to look like a harder task than I had bargained for.

“It sounds strangely,” I went on, “in my old-fashioned ears—-”

“What sounds strangely?” she asked.

“To hear you speak of your future husband as if you were not quite sure
of the sincerity of his attachment. Are you conscious of any reason in
your own mind for doubting him?”

Her astonishing quickness of perception, detected a change in my voice,
or my manner, when I put that question, which warned her that I had been
speaking all along with some ulterior object in view. She stopped, and
taking her arm out of mine, looked me searchingly in the face.

“Mr. Bruff,” she said, “you have something to tell me about Godfrey
Ablewhite. Tell it.”

I knew her well enough to take her at her word. I told it.

She put her arm again into mine, and walked on with me slowly. I felt
her hand tightening its grasp mechanically on my arm, and I saw her
getting paler and paler as I went on–but, not a word passed her lips
while I was speaking. When I had done, she still kept silence. Her head
drooped a little, and she walked by my side, unconscious of my presence,
unconscious of everything about her; lost–buried, I might almost say–in
her own thoughts.

I made no attempt to disturb her. My experience of her disposition
warned me, on this, as on former occasions, to give her time.

The first instinct of girls in general, on being told of anything which
interests them, is to ask a multitude of questions, and then to run off,
and talk it all over with some favourite friend. Rachel Verinder’s first
instinct, under similar circumstances, was to shut herself up in her own
mind, and to think it over by herself. This absolute self-dependence is
a great virtue in a man. In a woman it has a serious drawback of morally
separating her from the mass of her sex, and so exposing her to
misconstruction by the general opinion. I strongly suspect myself of
thinking as the rest of the world think in this matter–except in the
case of Rachel Verinder. The self-dependence in HER character, was one
of its virtues in my estimation; partly, no doubt, because I sincerely
admired and liked her; partly, because the view I took of her connexion
with the loss of the Moonstone was based on my own special knowledge of
her disposition. Badly as appearances might look, in the matter of the
Diamond–shocking as it undoubtedly was to know that she was associated
in any way with the mystery of an undiscovered theft–I was satisfied
nevertheless that she had done nothing unworthy of her, because I was
also satisfied that she had not stirred a step in the business, without
shutting herself up in her own mind, and thinking it over first.

We had walked on, for nearly a mile I should say before Rachel roused
herself. She suddenly looked up at me with a faint reflection of her
smile of happier times–the most irresistible smile I have ever seen on a
woman’s face.

“I owe much already to your kindness,” she said. “And I feel more deeply
indebted to it now than ever. If you hear any rumours of my marriage
when you get back to London contradict them at once, on my authority.”

“Have you resolved to break your engagement?” I asked.

“Can you doubt it?” she returned proudly, “after what you have told
me!”

“My dear Miss Rachel, you are very young–and you may find more
difficulty in withdrawing from your present position than you
anticipate. Have you no one–I mean a lady, of course–whom you could
consult?”

“No one,” she answered.

It distressed me, it did indeed distress me, to hear her say that. She
was so young and so lonely–and she bore it so well! The impulse to help
her got the better of any sense of my own unfitness which I might have
felt under the circumstances; and I stated such ideas on the subject as
occurred to me on the spur of the moment, to the best of my ability. I
have advised a prodigious number of clients, and have dealt with some
exceedingly awkward difficulties, in my time. But this was the first
occasion on which I had ever found myself advising a young lady how to
obtain her release from a marriage engagement. The suggestion I offered
amounted briefly to this. I recommended her to tell Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite–at a private interview, of course–that he had, to her certain
knowledge, betrayed the mercenary nature of the motive on his side. She
was then to add that their marriage, after what she had discovered, was
a simple impossibility–and she was to put it to him, whether he thought
it wisest to secure her silence by falling in with her views, or to
force her, by opposing them, to make the motive under which she was
acting generally known. If he attempted to defend himself, or to deny
the facts, she was, in that event, to refer him to ME.

Miss Verinder listened attentively till I had done. She then thanked me
very prettily for my advice, but informed me at the same time that it
was impossible for her to follow it.

“May I ask,” I said, “what objection you see to following it?”

She hesitated–and then met me with a question on her side.

“Suppose you were asked to express your opinion of Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite’s conduct?” she began.

“Yes?”

“What would you call it?”

“I should call it the conduct of a meanly deceitful man.”

“Mr. Bruff! I have believed in that man. I have promised to marry that
man. How can I tell him he is mean, how can I tell him he has deceived
me, how can I disgrace him in the eyes of the world after that? I have
degraded myself by ever thinking of him as my husband. If I say what you
tell me to say to him–I am owning that I have degraded myself to his
face. I can’t do that. After what has passed between us, I can’t do
that! The shame of it would be nothing to HIM. But the shame of it
would be unendurable to *me*.”

Here was another of the marked peculiarities in her character disclosing
itself to me without reserve. Here was her sensitive horror of the bare
contact with anything mean, blinding her to every consideration of what
she owed to herself, hurrying her into a false position which might
compromise her in the estimation of all her friends! Up to this time, I
had been a little diffident about the propriety of the advice I had
given to her. But, after what she had just said, I had no sort of doubt
that it was the best advice that could have been offered; and I felt no
sort of hesitation in pressing it on her again.

She only shook her head, and repeated her objection in other words.

“He has been intimate enough with me to ask me to be his wife. He has
stood high enough in my estimation to obtain my consent. I can’t tell
him to his face that he is the most contemptible of living creatures,
after that!”

“But, my dear Miss Rachel,” I remonstrated, “it’s equally impossible for
you to tell him that you withdraw from your engagement without giving
some reason for it.”

"I shall say that I have thought it over, and that I am satisfied it
will be best for both of us if we part.

“No more than that?”

“No more.”

“Have you thought of what he may say, on his side?”

“He may say what he pleases.”

It was impossible not to admire her delicacy and her resolution, and it
was equally impossible not to feel that she was putting herself in the
wrong. I entreated her to consider her own position. I reminded her that
she would be exposing herself to the most odious misconstruction of her
motives. “You can’t brave public opinion,” I said, “at the command of
private feeling.”

“I can,” she answered. “I have done it already.”

“What do you mean?”

“You have forgotten the Moonstone, Mr. Bruff. Have I not braved public
opinion, THERE, with my own private reasons for it?”

Her answer silenced me for the moment. It set me trying to trace the
explanation of her conduct, at the time of the loss of the Moonstone,
out of the strange avowal which had just escaped her. I might perhaps
have done it when I was younger. I certainly couldn’t do it now.

I tried a last remonstrance before we returned to the house. She was
just as immovable as ever. My mind was in a strange conflict of feelings
about her when I left her that day. She was obstinate; she was wrong.
She was interesting; she was admirable; she was deeply to be pitied. I
made her promise to write to me the moment she had any news to send. And
I went back to my business in London, with a mind exceedingly ill at
ease.

On the evening of my return, before it was possible for me to receive my
promised letter, I was surprised by a visit from Mr. Ablewhite the
elder, and was informed that Mr. Godfrey had got his dismissal–AND HAD
ACCEPTED IT–that very day.

With the view I already took of the case, the bare fact stated in the
words that I have underlined, revealed Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s motive
for submission as plainly as if he had acknowledged it himself. He
needed a large sum of money; and he needed it by a given time. Rachel’s
income, which would have helped him to anything else, would not help him
here; and Rachel had accordingly released herself, without encountering
a moment’s serious opposition on his part. If I am told that this is a
mere speculation, I ask, in my turn, what other theory will account for
his giving up a marriage which would have maintained him in splendour
for the rest of his life?

Any exultation I might otherwise have felt at the lucky turn which
things had now taken, was effectually checked by what passed at my
interview with old Mr. Ablewhite.

He came, of course, to know whether I could give him any explanation of
Miss Verinder’s extraordinary conduct. It is needless to say that I was
quite unable to afford him the information he wanted. The annoyance
which I thus inflicted, following on the irritation produced by a recent
interview with his son, threw Mr. Ablewhite off his guard. Both his
looks and his language convinced me that Miss Verinder would find him a
merciless man to deal with, when he joined the ladies at Brighton the
next day.

I had a restless night, considering what I ought to do next. How my
reflections ended, and how thoroughly well founded my distrust of
Mr. Ablewhite proved to be, are items of information which (as I am
told) have already been put tidily in their proper places, by that
exemplary person, Miss Clack. I have only to add–in completion of her
narrative–that Miss Verinder found the quiet and repose which she sadly
needed, poor thing, in my house at Hampstead. She honoured us by making
a long stay. My wife and daughters were charmed with her; and, when the
executors decided on the appointment of a new guardian, I feel sincere
pride and pleasure in recording that my guest and my family parted like
old friends, on either side.

### Chapter II

The next thing I have to do, is to present such additional information
as I possess on the subject of the Moonstone, or, to speak more
correctly, on the subject of the Indian plot to steal the Diamond. The
little that I have to tell is (as I think I have already said) of some
importance, nevertheless, in respect of its bearing very remarkably on
events which are still to come.

About a week or ten days after Miss Verinder had left us, one of my
clerks entered the private room at my office, with a card in his hand,
and informed me that a gentleman was below, who wanted to speak to me.

I looked at the card. There was a foreign name written on it, which has
escaped my memory. It was followed by a line written in English at the
bottom of the card, which I remember perfectly well:

“Recommended by Mr. Septimus Luker.”

The audacity of a person in Mr. Luker’s position presuming to recommend
anybody to me, took me so completely by surprise, that I sat silent for
the moment, wondering whether my own eyes had not deceived me. The
clerk, observing my bewilderment, favoured me with the result of his own
observation of the stranger who was waiting downstairs.

“He is rather a remarkable-looking man, sir. So dark in the complexion
that we all set him down in the office for an Indian, or something of
that sort.”

Associating the clerk’s idea with the line inscribed on the card in my
hand, I thought it possible that the Moonstone might be at the bottom of
Mr. Luker’s recommendation, and of the stranger’s visit at my office. To
the astonishment of my clerk, I at once decided on granting an interview
to the gentleman below.

In justification of the highly unprofessional sacrifice to mere
curiosity which I thus made, permit me to remind anybody who may read
these lines, that no living person (in England, at any rate) can claim
to have had such an intimate connexion with the romance of the Indian
Diamond as mine has been. I was trusted with the secret of Colonel
Herncastle’s plan for escaping assassination. I received the Colonel’s
letters, periodically reporting himself a living man. I drew his Will,
leaving the Moonstone to Miss Verinder. I persuaded his executor to act,
on the chance that the jewel might prove to be a valuable acquisition to
the family. And, lastly, I combated Mr. Franklin Blake’s scruples, and
induced him to be the means of transporting the Diamond to Lady
Verinder’s house. If anyone can claim a prescriptive right of interest
in the Moonstone, and in everything connected with it, I think it is
hardly to be denied that I am the man.

The moment my mysterious client was shown in, I felt an inner conviction
that I was in the presence of one of the three Indians–probably of the
chief. He was carefully dressed in European costume. But his swarthy
complexion, his long lithe figure, and his grave and graceful politeness
of manner were enough to betray his Oriental origin to any intelligent
eyes that looked at him.

I pointed to a chair, and begged to be informed of the nature of his
business with me.

After first apologising–in an excellent selection of English words–for
the liberty which he had taken in disturbing me, the Indian produced a
small parcel the outer covering of which was of cloth of gold. Removing
this and a second wrapping of some silken fabric, he placed a little
box, or casket, on my table, most beautifully and richly inlaid in
jewels, on an ebony ground.

“I have come, sir,” he said, “to ask you to lend me some money. And I
leave this as an assurance to you that my debt will be paid back.”

I pointed to his card. “And you apply to me,” I rejoined, “at
Mr. Luker’s recommendation?”

The Indian bowed.

“May I ask how it is that Mr. Luker himself did not advance the money
that you require?”

“Mr. Luker informed me, sir, that he had no money to lend.”

“And so he recommended you to come to me?”

The Indian, in his turn, pointed to the card. “It is written there,” he
said.

Briefly answered, and thoroughly to the purpose! If the Moonstone had
been in my possession, this Oriental gentleman would have murdered me, I
am well aware, without a moment’s hesitation. At the same time, and
barring that slight drawback, I am bound to testify that he was the
perfect model of a client. He might not have respected my life. But he
did what none of my own countrymen had ever done, in all my experience
of them–he respected my time.

“I am sorry,” I said, “that you should have had the trouble of coming to
me. Mr. Luker is quite mistaken in sending you here. I am trusted, like
other men in my profession, with money to lend. But I never lend it to
strangers, and I never lend it on such a security as you have produced.”

Far from attempting, as other people would have done, to induce me to
relax my own rules, the Indian only made me another bow, and wrapped up
his box in its two coverings without a word of protest. He rose–this
admirable assassin rose to go, the moment I had answered him!

“Will your condescension towards a stranger, excuse my asking one
question,” he said, “before I take my leave?”

I bowed on my side. Only one question at parting! The average in my
experience was fifty.

“Supposing, sir, it had been possible (and customary) for you to lend me
the money,” he said, “in what space of time would it have been possible
(and customary) for me to pay it back?”

“According to the usual course pursued in this country,” I answered,
“you would have been entitled to pay the money back (if you liked) in
one year’s time from the date at which it was first advanced to you.”

The Indian made me a last bow, the lowest of all–and suddenly and softly
walked out of the room.

It was done in a moment, in a noiseless, supple, cat-like way, which a
little startled me, I own. As soon as I was composed enough to think, I
arrived at one distinct conclusion in reference to the otherwise
incomprehensible visitor who had favoured me with a call.

His face, voice, and manner–while I was in his company–were under such
perfect control that they set all scrutiny at defiance. But he had given
me one chance of looking under the smooth outer surface of him, for all
that. He had not shown the slightest sign of attempting to fix anything
that I had said to him in his mind, until I mentioned the time at which
it was customary to permit the earliest repayment, on the part of a
debtor, of money that had been advanced as a loan. When I gave him that
piece of information, he looked me straight in the face, while I was
speaking, for the first time. The inference I drew from this was–that he
had a special purpose in asking me his last question, and a special
interest in hearing my answer to it. The more carefully I reflected on
what had passed between us, the more shrewdly I suspected the production
of the casket, and the application for the loan, of having been mere
formalities, designed to pave the way for the parting inquiry addressed
to me.

I had satisfied myself of the correctness of this conclusion–and was
trying to get on a step further, and penetrate the Indian’s motives
next–when a letter was brought to me, which proved to be from no less
a person that Mr. Septimus Luker himself. He asked my pardon in terms of
sickening servility, and assured me that he could explain matters to my
satisfaction, if I would honour him by consenting to a personal
interview.

I made another unprofessional sacrifice to mere curiosity. I honoured
him by making an appointment at my office, for the next day.

Mr. Luker was, in every respect, such an inferior creature to the
Indian–he was so vulgar, so ugly, so cringing, and so prosy–that he is
quite unworthy of being reported, at any length, in these pages. The
substance of what he had to tell me may be fairly stated as follows:

The day before I had received the visit of the Indian, Mr. Luker had
been favoured with a call from that accomplished gentleman. In spite of
his European disguise, Mr. Luker had instantly identified his visitor
with the chief of the three Indians, who had formerly annoyed him by
loitering about his house, and who had left him no alternative but to
consult a magistrate. From this startling discovery he had rushed to the
conclusion (naturally enough I own) that he must certainly be in the
company of one of the three men, who had blindfolded him, gagged him,
and robbed him of his banker’s receipt. The result was that he became
quite paralysed with terror, and that he firmly believed his last hour
had come.

On his side, the Indian preserved the character of a perfect stranger.
He produced the little casket, and made exactly the same application
which he had afterwards made to me. As the speediest way of getting rid
of him, Mr. Luker had at once declared that he had no money. The Indian
had thereupon asked to be informed of the best and safest person to
apply to for the loan he wanted. Mr. Luker had answered that the best
and safest person, in such cases, was usually a respectable solicitor.
Asked to name some individual of that character and profession,
Mr. Luker had mentioned me–for the one simple reason that, in the
extremity of his terror, mine was the first name which occurred to him.
“The perspiration was pouring off me like rain, sir,” the wretched
creature concluded. “I didn’t know what I was talking about. And I hope
you’ll look over it, Mr. Bruff, sir, in consideration of my having been
really and truly frightened out of my wits.”

I excused the fellow graciously enough. It was the readiest way of
releasing myself from the sight of him. Before he left me, I detained
him to make one inquiry.

Had the Indian said anything noticeable, at the moment of quitting
Mr. Luker’s house?

Yes! The Indian had put precisely the same question to Mr. Luker, at
parting, which he had put to me; receiving of course, the same answer as
the answer which I had given him.

What did it mean? Mr. Luker’s explanation gave me no assistance towards
solving the problem. My own unaided ingenuity, consulted next, proved
quite unequal to grapple with the difficulty. I had a dinner engagement
that evening; and I went upstairs, in no very genial frame of mind,
little suspecting that the way to my dressing-room and the way to
discovery, meant, on this particular occasion, one and the same thing.

### Chapter III

The prominent personage among the guests at the dinner party I found to
be Mr. Murthwaite.

On his appearance in England, after his wanderings, society had been
greatly interested in the traveller, as a man who had passed through
many dangerous adventures, and who had escaped to tell the tale. He had
now announced his intention of returning to the scene of his exploits,
and of penetrating into regions left still unexplored. This magnificent
indifference to placing his safety in peril for the second time, revived
the flagging interest of the worshippers in the hero. The law of chances
was clearly against his escaping on this occasion. It is not every day
that we can meet an eminent person at dinner, and feel that there is a
reasonable prospect of the news of his murder being the news that we
hear of him next.

When the gentlemen were left by themselves in the dining-room, I found
myself sitting next to Mr. Murthwaite. The guests present being all
English, it is needless to say that, as soon as the wholesome check
exercised by the presence of the ladies was removed, the conversation
turned on politics as a necessary result.

In respect to this all-absorbing national topic, I happen to be one of
the most un-English Englishmen living. As a general rule, political talk
appears to me to be of all talk the most dreary and the most profitless.
Glancing at Mr. Murthwaite, when the bottles had made their first round
of the table, I found that he was apparently of my way of thinking. He
was doing it very dexterously–with all possible consideration for the
feelings of his host–but it is not the less certain that he was
composing himself for a nap. It struck me as an experiment worth
attempting, to try whether a judicious allusion to the subject of the
Moonstone would keep him awake, and, if it did, to see what HE thought
of the last new complication in the Indian conspiracy, as revealed in
the prosaic precincts of my office.

“If I am not mistaken, Mr. Murthwaite,” I began, “you were acquainted
with the late Lady Verinder, and you took some interest in the strange
succession of events which ended in the loss of the Moonstone?”

The eminent traveller did me the honour of waking up in an instant, and
asking me who I was.

I informed him of my professional connection with the Herncastle family,
not forgetting the curious position which I had occupied towards the
Colonel and his Diamond in the bygone time.

Mr. Murthwaite shifted round in his chair, so as to put the rest of the
company behind him (Conservatives and Liberals alike), and concentrated
his whole attention on plain Mr. Bruff, of Gray’s Inn Square.

“Have you heard anything, lately, of the Indians?” he asked.

“I have every reason to believe,” I answered, “that one of them had an
interview with me, in my office, yesterday.”

Mr. Murthwaite was not an easy man to astonish; but that last answer of
mine completely staggered him. I described what had happened to
Mr. Luker, and what had happened to myself, exactly as I have described
it here. “It is clear that the Indian’s parting inquiry had an object,”
I added. “Why should he be so anxious to know the time at which a
borrower of money is usually privileged to pay the money back?”

“Is it possible that you don’t see his motive, Mr. Bruff?”

“I am ashamed of my stupidity, Mr. Murthwaite–but I certainly don’t see
it.”

The great traveller became quite interested in sounding the immense
vacuity of my dulness to its lowest depths.

“Let me ask you one question,” he said. “In what position does the
conspiracy to seize the Moonstone now stand?”

“I can’t say,” I answered. “The Indian plot is a mystery to me.”

“The Indian plot, Mr. Bruff, can only be a mystery to you, because you
have never seriously examined it. Shall we run it over together, from
the time when you drew Colonel Herncastle’s Will, to the time when the
Indian called at your office? In your position, it may be of very
serious importance to the interests of Miss Verinder, that you should be
able to take a clear view of this matter in case of need. Tell me,
bearing that in mind, whether you will penetrate the Indian’s motive for
yourself? or whether you wish me to save you the trouble of making any
inquiry into it?”

It is needless to say that I thoroughly appreciated the practical
purpose which I now saw that he had in view, and that the first of the
two alternatives was the alternative I chose.

“Very good,” said Mr. Murthwaite. “We will take the question of the ages
of the three Indians first. I can testify that they all look much about
the same age–and you can decide for yourself, whether the man whom you
saw was, or was not, in the prime of life. Not forty, you think? My idea
too. We will say not forty. Now look back to the time when Colonel
Herncastle came to England, and when you were concerned in the plan he
adopted to preserve his life. I don’t want you to count the years. I
will only say, it is clear that these present Indians, at their age,
must be the successors of three other Indians (high caste Brahmins all
of them, Mr. Bruff, when they left their native country!) who followed
the Colonel to these shores. Very well. These present men of ours have
succeeded to the men who were here before them. If they had only done
that, the matter would not have been worth inquiring into. But they have
done more. They have succeeded to the organisation which their
predecessors established in this country. Don’t start! The organisation
is a very trumpery affair, according to our ideas, I have no doubt. I
should reckon it up as including the command of money; the services,
when needed, of that shady sort of Englishman, who lives in the byways
of foreign life in London; and, lastly, the secret sympathy of such few
men of their own country, and (formerly, at least) of their own
religion, as happen to be employed in ministering to some of the
multitudinous wants of this great city. Nothing very formidable, as you
see! But worth notice at starting, because we may find occasion to
refer to this modest little Indian organisation as we go on. Having now
cleared the ground, I am going to ask you a question; and I expect your
experience to answer it. What was the event which gave the Indians their
first chance of seizing the Diamond?”

I understood the allusion to my experience.

“The first chance they got,” I replied, “was clearly offered to them by
Colonel Herncastle’s death. They would be aware of his death, I suppose,
as a matter of course?”

“As a matter of course. And his death, as you say, gave them their first
chance. Up to that time the Moonstone was safe in the strong-room of the
bank. You drew the Colonel’s Will leaving his jewel to his niece; and
the Will was proved in the usual way. As a lawyer, you can be at no loss
to know what course the Indians would take (under English advice) after
THAT.”

“They would provide themselves with a copy of the Will from Doctors’
Commons,” I said.

“Exactly. One or other of those shady Englishmen to whom I have alluded,
would get them the copy you have described. That copy would inform them
that the Moonstone was bequeathed to the daughter of Lady Verinder, and
that Mr. Blake the elder, or some person appointed by him, was to place
it in her hands. You will agree with me that the necessary information
about persons in the position of Lady Verinder and Mr. Blake, would be
perfectly easy information to obtain. The one difficulty for the Indians
would be to decide whether they should make their attempt on the Diamond
when it was in course of removal from the keeping of the bank, or
whether they should wait until it was taken down to Yorkshire to Lady
Verinder’s house. The second way would be manifestly the safest way–and
there you have the explanation of the appearance of the Indians at
Frizinghall, disguised as jugglers, and waiting their time. In London,
it is needless to say, they had their organisation at their disposal to
keep them informed of events. Two men would do it. One to follow anybody
who went from Mr. Blake’s house to the bank. And one to treat the lower
men servants with beer, and to hear the news of the house. These
commonplace precautions would readily inform them that Mr. Franklin
Blake had been to the bank, and that Mr. Franklin Blake was the only
person in the house who was going to visit Lady Verinder. What actually
followed upon that discovery, you remember, no doubt, quite as correctly
as I do.”

I remembered that Franklin Blake had detected one of the spies, in the
street–that he had, in consequence, advanced the time of his arrival in
Yorkshire by some hours–and that (thanks to old Betteredge’s excellent
advice) he had lodged the Diamond in the bank at Frizinghall, before the
Indians were so much as prepared to see him in the neighbourhood. All
perfectly clear so far. But the Indians being ignorant of the
precautions thus taken, how was it that they had made no attempt on Lady
Verinder’s house (in which they must have supposed the Diamond to be)
through the whole of the interval that elapsed before Rachel’s birthday?

In putting this difficulty to Mr. Murthwaite, I thought it right to add
that I had heard of the little boy, and the drop of ink, and the rest of
it, and that any explanation based on the theory of clairvoyance was an
explanation which would carry no conviction whatever with it, to MY
mind.

“Nor to mine either,” said Mr. Murthwaite. “The clairvoyance in this
case is simply a development of the romantic side of the Indian
character. It would be refreshment and an encouragement to those
men–quite inconceivable, I grant you, to the English mind–to surround
their wearisome and perilous errand in this country with a certain halo
of the marvellous and the supernatural. Their boy is unquestionably a
sensitive subject to the mesmeric influence–and, under that influence,
he has no doubt reflected what was already in the mind of the person
mesmerising him. I have tested the theory of clairvoyance–and I have
never found the manifestations get beyond that point. The Indians don’t
investigate the matter in this way; the Indians look upon their boy as a
Seer of things invisible to their eyes–and, I repeat, in that marvel
they find the source of a new interest in the purpose that unites them.
I only notice this as offering a curious view of human character, which
must be quite new to you. We have nothing whatever to do with
clairvoyance, or with mesmerism, or with anything else that is hard of
belief to a practical man, in the inquiry that we are now pursuing. My
object in following the Indian plot, step by step, is to trace results
back, by rational means, to natural causes. Have I succeeded to your
satisfaction so far?”

“Not a doubt of it, Mr. Murthwaite! I am waiting, however, with some
anxiety, to hear the rational explanation of the difficulty which I have
just had the honour of submitting to you.”

Mr. Murthwaite smiled. “It’s the easiest difficulty to deal with of
all,” he said. “Permit me to begin by admitting your statement of the
case as a perfectly correct one. The Indians were undoubtedly not aware
of what Mr. Franklin Blake had done with the Diamond–for we find them
making their first mistake, on the first night of Mr. Blake’s arrival at
his aunt’s house.”

“Their first mistake?” I repeated.

“Certainly! The mistake of allowing themselves to be surprised, lurking
about the terrace at night, by Gabriel Betteredge. However, they had the
merit of seeing for themselves that they had taken a false step–for, as
you say, again, with plenty of time at their disposal, they never came
near the house for weeks afterwards.”

“Why, Mr. Murthwaite? That’s what I want to know! Why?”

“Because no Indian, Mr. Bruff, ever runs an unnecessary risk. The clause
you drew in Colonel Herncastle’s Will, informed them (didn’t it?) that
the Moonstone was to pass absolutely into Miss Verinder’s possession on
her birthday. Very well. Tell me which was the safest course for men in
their position? To make their attempt on the Diamond while it was under
the control of Mr. Franklin Blake, who had shown already that he could
suspect and outwit them? Or to wait till the Diamond was at the disposal
of a young girl, who would innocently delight in wearing the magnificent
jewel at every possible opportunity? Perhaps you want a proof that my
theory is correct? Take the conduct of the Indians themselves as the
proof. They appeared at the house, after waiting all those weeks, on
Miss Verinder’s birthday; and they were rewarded for the patient
accuracy of their calculations by seeing the Moonstone in the bosom of
her dress! When I heard the story of the Colonel and the Diamond, later
in the evening, I felt so sure about the risk Mr. Franklin Blake had run
(they would have certainly attacked him, if he had not happened to ride
back to Lady Verinder’s in the company of other people); and I was so
strongly convinced of the worse risk still, in store for Miss Verinder,
that I recommended following the Colonel’s plan, and destroying the
identity of the gem by having it cut into separate stones. How its
extraordinary disappearance that night, made my advice useless, and
utterly defeated the Hindoo plot–and how all further action on the part
of the Indians was paralysed the next day by their confinement in prison
as rogues and vagabonds–you know as well as I do. The first act in the
conspiracy closes there. Before we go on to the second, may I ask
whether I have met your difficulty, with an explanation which is
satisfactory to the mind of a practical man?”

It was impossible to deny that he had met my difficulty fairly; thanks
to his superior knowledge of the Indian character–and thanks to his not
having had hundreds of other Wills to think of since Colonel
Herncastle’s time!

“So far, so good,” resumed Mr. Murthwaite. “The first chance the Indians
had of seizing the Diamond was a chance lost, on the day when they were
committed to the prison at Frizinghall. When did the second chance offer
itself? The second chance offered itself–as I am in a condition to
prove–while they were still in confinement.”

He took out his pocket-book, and opened it at a particular leaf, before
he went on.

“I was staying,” he resumed, “with some friends at Frizinghall, at the
time. A day or two before the Indians were set free (on a Monday, I
think), the governor of the prison came to me with a letter. It had been
left for the Indians by one Mrs. Macann, of whom they had hired the
lodging in which they lived; and it had been delivered at Mrs. Macann’s
door, in ordinary course of post, on the previous morning. The prison
authorities had noticed that the postmark was ‘Lambeth,’ and that the
address on the outside, though expressed in correct English, was, in
form, oddly at variance with the customary method of directing a letter.
On opening it, they had found the contents to be written in a foreign
language, which they rightly guessed at as Hindustani. Their object in
coming to me was, of course, to have the letter translated to them. I
took a copy in my pocket-book of the original, and of my translation–and
there they are at your service.”

He handed me the open pocket-book. The address on the letter was the
first thing copied. It was all written in one paragraph, without any
attempt at punctuation, thus: “To the three Indian men living with the
lady called Macann at Frizinghall in Yorkshire.” The Hindoo characters
followed; and the English translation appeared at the end, expressed in
these mysterious words:

"In the name of the Regent of the Night, whose seat is on the Antelope,
whose arms embrace the four corners of the earth.

"Brothers, turn your faces to the south, and come to me in the street of
many noises, which leads down to the muddy river.

"The reason is this.

“My own eyes have seen it.”

There the letter ended, without either date or signature. I handed it
back to Mr. Murthwaite, and owned that this curious specimen of Hindoo
correspondence rather puzzled me.

“I can explain the first sentence to you,” he said; “and the conduct of
the Indians themselves will explain the rest. The god of the moon is
represented, in the Hindoo mythology, as a four-armed deity, seated on
an antelope; and one of his titles is the regent of the night. Here,
then, to begin with, is something which looks suspiciously like an
indirect reference to the Moonstone. Now, let us see what the Indians
did, after the prison authorities had allowed them to receive their
letter. On the very day when they were set free they went at once to the
railway station, and took their places in the first train that started
for London. We all thought it a pity at Frizinghall that their
proceedings were not privately watched. But, after Lady Verinder had
dismissed the police-officer, and had stopped all further inquiry into
the loss of the Diamond, no one else could presume to stir in the
matter. The Indians were free to go to London, and to London they went.
What was the next news we heard of them, Mr. Bruff?”

“They were annoying Mr. Luker,” I answered, “by loitering about the
house at Lambeth.”

“Did you read the report of Mr. Luker’s application to the magistrate?”

“Yes.”

“In the course of his statement he referred, if you remember, to a
foreign workman in his employment, whom he had just dismissed on
suspicion of attempted theft, and whom he also distrusted as possibly
acting in collusion with the Indians who had annoyed him. The inference
is pretty plain, Mr. Bruff, as to who wrote that letter which puzzled
you just now, and as to which of Mr. Luker’s Oriental treasures the
workman had attempted to steal.”

The inference (as I hastened to acknowledge) was too plain to need being
pointed out. I had never doubted that the Moonstone had found its way
into Mr. Luker’s hands, at the time Mr. Murthwaite alluded to. My only
question had been, How had the Indians discovered the circumstance? This
question (the most difficult to deal with of all, as I had thought) had
now received its answer, like the rest. Lawyer as I was, I began to feel
that I might trust Mr. Murthwaite to lead me blindfold through the last
windings of the labyrinth, along which he had guided me thus far. I paid
him the compliment of telling him this, and found my little concession
very graciously received.

“You shall give me a piece of information in your turn before we go on,”
he said. “Somebody must have taken the Moonstone from Yorkshire to
London. And somebody must have raised money on it, or it would never
have been in Mr. Luker’s possession. Has there been any discovery made
of who that person was?”

“None that I know of.”

“There was a story (was there not?) about Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. I am
told he is an eminent philanthropist–which is decidedly against him, to
begin with.”

I heartily agreed in this with Mr. Murthwaite. At the same time, I felt
bound to inform him (without, it is needless to say, mentioning Miss
Verinder’s name) that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite had been cleared of all
suspicion, on evidence which I could answer for as entirely beyond
dispute.

“Very well,” said Mr. Murthwaite, quietly, “let us leave it to time to
clear the matter up. In the meanwhile, Mr. Bruff, we must get back again
to the Indians, on your account. Their journey to London simply ended in
their becoming the victims of another defeat. The loss of their second
chance of seizing the Diamond is mainly attributable, as I think, to the
cunning and foresight of Mr. Luker–who doesn’t stand at the top of the
prosperous and ancient profession of usury for nothing! By the prompt
dismissal of the man in his employment, he deprived the Indians of the
assistance which their confederate would have rendered them in getting
into the house. By the prompt transport of the Moonstone to his
banker’s, he took the conspirators by surprise before they were
prepared with a new plan for robbing him. How the Indians, in this
latter case, suspected what he had done, and how they contrived to
possess themselves of his banker’s receipt, are events too recent to
need dwelling on. Let it be enough to say that they know the Moonstone
to be once more out of their reach; deposited (under the general
description of ‘a valuable of great price’) in a banker’s strong room.
Now, Mr. Bruff, what is their third chance of seizing the Diamond? and
when will it come?”

As the question passed his lips, I penetrated the motive of the Indian’s
visit to my office at last!

“I see it!” I exclaimed. “The Indians take it for granted, as we do,
that the Moonstone has been pledged; and they want to be certainly
informed of the earliest period at which the pledge can be
redeemed–because that will be the earliest period at which the Diamond
can be removed from the safe keeping of the bank!”

“I told you you would find it out for yourself, Mr. Bruff, if I only
gave you a fair chance. In a year from the time when the Moonstone was
pledged, the Indians will be on the watch for their third chance.
Mr. Luker’s own lips have told them how long they will have to wait,
and your respectable authority has satisfied them that Mr. Luker has
spoken the truth. When do we suppose, at a rough guess, that the Diamond
found its way into the money-lender’s hands?”

“Towards the end of last June,” I answered, “as well as I can reckon
it.”

“And we are now in the year ’forty-eight. Very good. If the unknown
person who has pledged the Moonstone can redeem it in a year, the jewel
will be in that person’s possession again at the end of June,
’forty-nine. I shall be thousands of miles from England and English
news at that date. But it may be worth YOUR while to take a note of it,
and to arrange to be in London at the time.”

“You think something serious will happen?” I said.

“I think I shall be safer,” he answered, “among the fiercest fanatics of
Central Asia than I should be if I crossed the door of the bank with the
Moonstone in my pocket. The Indians have been defeated twice running,
Mr. Bruff. It’s my firm belief that they won’t be defeated a third
time.”

Those were the last words he said on the subject. The coffee came in;
the guests rose, and dispersed themselves about the room; and we joined
the ladies of the dinner-party upstairs.

I made a note of the date, and it may not be amiss if I close my
narrative by repeating that note here:

JUNE, ’FORTY-NINE. EXPECT NEWS OF THE INDIANS, TOWARDS THE END OF THE
MONTH.

And that done, I hand the pen, which I have now no further claim to use,
to the writer who follows me next.
