First Narrative

Contributed by MISS CLACK; niece of the late SIR JOHN VERINDER

### Chapter I

I am indebted to my dear parents (both now in heaven) for having had
habits of order and regularity instilled into me at a very early age.

In that happy bygone time, I was taught to keep my hair tidy at all
hours of the day and night, and to fold up every article of my clothing
carefully, in the same order, on the same chair, in the same place at
the foot of the bed, before retiring to rest. An entry of the day’s
events in my little diary invariably preceded the folding up. The
“Evening Hymn” (repeated in bed) invariably followed the folding up.
And the sweet sleep of childhood invariably followed the “Evening Hymn.”

In later life (alas!) the Hymn has been succeeded by sad and bitter
meditations; and the sweet sleep has been but ill exchanged for the
broken slumbers which haunt the uneasy pillow of care. On the other
hand, I have continued to fold my clothes, and to keep my little diary.
The former habit links me to my happy childhood–before papa was ruined.
The latter habit–hitherto mainly useful in helping me to discipline the
fallen nature which we all inherit from Adam–has unexpectedly proved
important to my humble interests in quite another way. It has enabled
poor Me to serve the caprice of a wealthy member of the family into
which my late uncle married. I am fortunate enough to be useful to
Mr. Franklin Blake.

I have been cut off from all news of my relatives by marriage for some
time past. When we are isolated and poor, we are not infrequently
forgotten. I am now living, for economy’s sake, in a little town in
Brittany, inhabited by a select circle of serious English friends, and
possessed of the inestimable advantages of a Protestant clergyman and a
cheap market.

In this retirement–a Patmos amid the howling ocean of popery that
surrounds us–a letter from England has reached me at last. I find my
insignificant existence suddenly remembered by Mr. Franklin Blake. My
wealthy relative–would that I could add my spiritually-wealthy
relative!–writes, without even an attempt at disguising that he wants
something of me. The whim has seized him to stir up the deplorable
scandal of the Moonstone: and I am to help him by writing the account of
what I myself witnessed while visiting at Aunt Verinder’s house in
London. Pecuniary remuneration is offered to me–with the want of feeling
peculiar to the rich. I am to re-open wounds that Time has barely
closed; I am to recall the most intensely painful remembrances–and this
done, I am to feel myself compensated by a new laceration, in the shape
of Mr. Blake’s cheque. My nature is weak. It cost me a hard struggle,
before Christian humility conquered sinful pride, and self-denial
accepted the cheque.

Without my diary, I doubt–pray let me express it in the grossest
terms!–if I could have honestly earned my money. With my diary, the
poor labourer (who forgives Mr. Blake for insulting her) is worthy of
her hire. Nothing escaped me at the time I was visiting dear Aunt
Verinder. Everything was entered (thanks to my early training) day by
day as it happened; and everything down to the smallest particular,
shall be told here. My sacred regard for truth is (thank God) far above
my respect for persons. It will be easy for Mr. Blake to suppress what
may not prove to be sufficiently flattering in these pages to the person
chiefly concerned in them. He has purchased my time, but not even HIS
wealth can purchase my conscience too.[^fn1] 

[^fn1]: ADDED BY FRANKLIN BLAKE.–Miss Clack may make her mind quite easy on this point. Nothing will be added, altered or removed, in her manuscript, or in any of the other manuscripts which pass through my hands. Whatever opinions any of the writers may express, whatever peculiarities of treatment may mark, and perhaps in a literary sense, disfigure the narratives which I am now collecting, not a line will be tampered with anywhere, from first to last. As genuine documents they are sent to me–and as genuine documents I shall preserve them, endorsed by the attestations of witnesses who can speak to the facts. It only remains to be added that “the person chiefly concerned” in Miss Clack’s narrative, is happy enough at the present moment, not only to brave the smartest exercise of Miss Clack’s pen, but even to recognise its unquestionable value as an instrument for the exhibition of Miss Clack’s character.

My diary informs me, that I was accidentally passing Aunt Verinder’s
house in Montagu Square, on Monday, 3rd July, 1848.

Seeing the shutters opened, and the blinds drawn up, I felt that it
would be an act of polite attention to knock, and make inquiries. The
person who answered the door, informed me that my aunt and her daughter
(I really cannot call her my cousin!) had arrived from the country a
week since, and meditated making some stay in London. I sent up a
message at once, declining to disturb them, and only begging to know
whether I could be of any use.

The person who answered the door, took my message in insolent silence,
and left me standing in the hall. She is the daughter of a heathen old
man named Betteredge–long, too long, tolerated in my aunt’s family. I
sat down in the hall to wait for my answer–and, having always a few
tracts in my bag, I selected one which proved to be quite providentially
applicable to the person who answered the door. The hall was dirty, and
the chair was hard; but the blessed consciousness of returning good for
evil raised me quite above any trifling considerations of that kind. The
tract was one of a series addressed to young women on the sinfulness of
dress. In style it was devoutly familiar. Its title was, “A Word With
You On Your Cap-Ribbons.”

“My lady is much obliged, and begs you will come and lunch to-morrow at
two.”

I passed over the manner in which she gave her message, and the dreadful
boldness of her look. I thanked this young castaway; and I said, in a
tone of Christian interest, “Will you favour me by accepting a tract?”

She looked at the title. “Is it written by a man or a woman, Miss? If
it’s written by a woman, I had rather not read it on that account. If
it’s written by a man, I beg to inform him that he knows nothing about
it.” She handed me back the tract, and opened the door. We must sow the
good seed somehow. I waited till the door was shut on me, and slipped
the tract into the letter-box. When I had dropped another tract through
the area railings, I felt relieved, in some small degree, of a heavy
responsibility towards others.

We had a meeting that evening of the Select Committee of the
Mothers’-Small-Clothes-Conversion-Society. The object of this
excellent Charity is–as all serious people know–to rescue unredeemed
fathers’ trousers from the pawnbroker, and to prevent their resumption,
on the part of the irreclaimable parent, by abridging them immediately
to suit the proportions of the innocent son. I was a member, at that
time, of the select committee; and I mention the Society here, because
my precious and admirable friend, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, was associated
with our work of moral and material usefulness. I had expected to see
him in the boardroom, on the Monday evening of which I am now writing,
and had proposed to tell him, when we met, of dear Aunt Verinder’s
arrival in London. To my great disappointment he never appeared. On my
expressing a feeling of surprise at his absence, my sisters of the
Committee all looked up together from their trousers (we had a great
pressure of business that night), and asked in amazement, if I had not
heard the news. I acknowledged my ignorance, and was then told, for the
first time, of an event which forms, so to speak, the starting-point of
this narrative. On the previous Friday, two gentlemen–occupying
widely-different positions in society–had been the victims of an outrage
which had startled all London. One of the gentlemen was Mr. Septimus
Luker, of Lambeth. The other was Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

Living in my present isolation, I have no means of introducing the
newspaper-account of the outrage into my narrative. I was also deprived,
at the time, of the inestimable advantage of hearing the events related
by the fervid eloquence of Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. All I can do is to
state the facts as they were stated, on that Monday evening, to me;
proceeding on the plan which I have been taught from infancy to adopt in
folding up my clothes. Everything shall be put neatly, and everything
shall be put in its place. These lines are written by a poor weak woman.
From a poor weak woman who will be cruel enough to expect more?

The date–thanks to my dear parents, no dictionary that ever was written
can be more particular than I am about dates–was Friday, June 30th,
1848.

Early on that memorable day, our gifted Mr. Godfrey happened to be
cashing a cheque at a banking-house in Lombard Street. The name of the
firm is accidentally blotted in my diary, and my sacred regard for truth
forbids me to hazard a guess in a matter of this kind. Fortunately, the
name of the firm doesn’t matter. What does matter is a circumstance that
occurred when Mr. Godfrey had transacted his business. On gaining the
door, he encountered a gentleman–a perfect stranger to him–who was
accidentally leaving the office exactly at the same time as himself. A
momentary contest of politeness ensued between them as to who should be
the first to pass through the door of the bank. The stranger insisted on
making Mr. Godfrey precede him; Mr. Godfrey said a few civil words; they
bowed, and parted in the street.

Thoughtless and superficial people may say, Here is surely a very
trumpery little incident related in an absurdly circumstantial manner.
Oh, my young friends and fellow-sinners! beware of presuming to
exercise your poor carnal reason. Oh, be morally tidy. Let your faith be
as your stockings, and your stockings as your faith. Both ever spotless,
and both ready to put on at a moment’s notice!

I beg a thousand pardons. I have fallen insensibly into my Sunday-school
style. Most inappropriate in such a record as this. Let me try to be
worldly–let me say that trifles, in this case as in many others, led to
terrible results. Merely premising that the polite stranger was
Mr. Luker, of Lambeth, we will now follow Mr. Godfrey home to his
residence at Kilburn.

He found waiting for him, in the hall, a poorly clad but delicate and
interesting-looking little boy. The boy handed him a letter, merely
mentioning that he had been entrusted with it by an old lady whom he did
not know, and who had given him no instructions to wait for an answer.
Such incidents as these were not uncommon in Mr. Godfrey’s large
experience as a promoter of public charities. He let the boy go, and
opened the letter.

The handwriting was entirely unfamiliar to him. It requested his
attendance, within an hour’s time, at a house in Northumberland Street,
Strand, which he had never had occasion to enter before. The object
sought was to obtain from the worthy manager certain details on the
subject of the Mothers’-Small-Clothes-Conversion-Society, and the
information was wanted by an elderly lady who proposed adding largely to
the resources of the charity, if her questions were met by satisfactory
replies. She mentioned her name, and she added that the shortness of her
stay in London prevented her from giving any longer notice to the
eminent philanthropist whom she addressed.

Ordinary people might have hesitated before setting aside their own
engagements to suit the convenience of a stranger. The Christian Hero
never hesitates where good is to be done. Mr. Godfrey instantly turned
back, and proceeded to the house in Northumberland Street. A most
respectable though somewhat corpulent man answered the door, and, on
hearing Mr. Godfrey’s name, immediately conducted him into an empty
apartment at the back, on the drawing-room floor. He noticed two unusual
things on entering the room. One of them was a faint odour of musk and
camphor. The other was an ancient Oriental manuscript, richly
illuminated with Indian figures and devices, that lay open to inspection
on a table.

He was looking at the book, the position of which caused him to stand
with his back turned towards the closed folding doors communicating with
the front room, when, without the slightest previous noise to warn him,
he felt himself suddenly seized round the neck from behind. He had just
time to notice that the arm round his neck was naked and of a
tawny-brown colour, before his eyes were bandaged, his mouth was gagged,
and he was thrown helpless on the floor by (as he judged) two men. A
third rifled his pockets, and–if, as a lady, I may venture to use such
an expression–searched him, without ceremony, through and through to his
skin.

Here I should greatly enjoy saying a few cheering words on the devout
confidence which could alone have sustained Mr. Godfrey in an emergency
so terrible as this. Perhaps, however, the position and appearance of my
admirable friend at the culminating period of the outrage (as above
described) are hardly within the proper limits of female discussion. Let
me pass over the next few moments, and return to Mr. Godfrey at the time
when the odious search of his person had been completed. The outrage had
been perpetrated throughout in dead silence. At the end of it some words
were exchanged, among the invisible wretches, in a language which he did
not understand, but in tones which were plainly expressive (to his
cultivated ear) of disappointment and rage. He was suddenly lifted from
the ground, placed in a chair, and bound there hand and foot. The next
moment he felt the air flowing in from the open door, listened, and
concluded that he was alone again in the room.

An interval elapsed, and he heard a sound below like the rustling sound
of a woman’s dress. It advanced up the stairs, and stopped. A female
scream rent the atmosphere of guilt. A man’s voice below exclaimed
“Hullo!” A man’s feet ascended the stairs. Mr. Godfrey felt Christian
fingers unfastening his bandage, and extracting his gag. He looked in
amazement at two respectable strangers, and faintly articulated, “What
does it mean?” The two respectable strangers looked back, and said,
“Exactly the question we were going to ask YOU.”

The inevitable explanation followed. No! Let me be scrupulously
particular. Sal volatile and water followed, to compose dear
Mr. Godfrey’s nerves. The explanation came next.

It appeared from the statement of the landlord and landlady of the house
(persons of good repute in the neighbourhood), that their first and
second floor apartments had been engaged, on the previous day, for a
week certain, by a most respectable-looking gentleman–the same who has
been already described as answering the door to Mr. Godfrey’s knock. The
gentleman had paid the week’s rent and all the week’s extras in advance,
stating that the apartments were wanted for three Oriental noblemen,
friends of his, who were visiting England for the first time. Early on
the morning of the outrage, two of the Oriental strangers, accompanied
by their respectable English friend, took possession of the apartments.
The third was expected to join them shortly; and the luggage (reported
as very bulky) was announced to follow when it had passed through the
Custom-house, late in the afternoon. Not more than ten minutes previous
to Mr. Godfrey’s visit, the third foreigner had arrived. Nothing out of
the common had happened, to the knowledge of the landlord and landlady
down-stairs, until within the last five minutes–when they had seen the
three foreigners, accompanied by their respectable English friend, all
leave the house together, walking quietly in the direction of the
Strand. Remembering that a visitor had called, and not having seen the
visitor also leave the house, the landlady had thought it rather strange
that the gentleman should be left by himself up-stairs. After a short
discussion with her husband, she had considered it advisable to
ascertain whether anything was wrong. The result had followed, as I have
already attempted to describe it; and there the explanation of the
landlord and the landlady came to an end.

An investigation was next made in the room. Dear Mr. Godfrey’s property
was found scattered in all directions. When the articles were collected,
however, nothing was missing; his watch, chain, purse, keys,
pocket-handkerchief, note-book, and all his loose papers had been
closely examined, and had then been left unharmed to be resumed by the
owner. In the same way, not the smallest morsel of property belonging to
the proprietors of the house had been abstracted. The Oriental noblemen
had removed their own illuminated manuscript, and had removed nothing
else.

What did it mean? Taking the worldly point of view, it appeared to mean
that Mr. Godfrey had been the victim of some incomprehensible error,
committed by certain unknown men. A dark conspiracy was on foot in the
midst of us; and our beloved and innocent friend had been entangled in
its meshes. When the Christian hero of a hundred charitable victories
plunges into a pitfall that has been dug for him by mistake, oh, what a
warning it is to the rest of us to be unceasingly on our guard! How
soon may our own evil passions prove to be Oriental noblemen who pounce
on us unawares!

I could write pages of affectionate warning on this one theme, but
(alas!) I am not permitted to improve–I am condemned to narrate. My
wealthy relative’s cheque–henceforth, the incubus of my existence–warns
me that I have not done with this record of violence yet. We must leave
Mr. Godfrey to recover in Northumberland Street, and must follow the
proceedings of Mr. Luker at a later period of the day.

After leaving the bank, Mr. Luker had visited various parts of London on
business errands. Returning to his own residence, he found a letter
waiting for him, which was described as having been left a short time
previously by a boy. In this case, as in Mr. Godfrey’s case, the
handwriting was strange; but the name mentioned was the name of one of
Mr. Luker’s customers. His correspondent announced (writing in the third
person–apparently by the hand of a deputy) that he had been unexpectedly
summoned to London. He had just established himself in lodgings in
Alfred Place, Tottenham Court Road; and he desired to see Mr. Luker
immediately, on the subject of a purchase which he contemplated making.
The gentleman was an enthusiastic collector of Oriental antiquities, and
had been for many years a liberal patron of the establishment in
Lambeth. Oh, when shall we wean ourselves from the worship of Mammon!
Mr. Luker called a cab, and drove off instantly to his liberal patron.

Exactly what had happened to Mr. Godfrey in Northumberland Street now
happened to Mr. Luker in Alfred Place. Once more the respectable man
answered the door, and showed the visitor up-stairs into the back
drawing-room. There, again, lay the illuminated manuscript on a table.
Mr. Luker’s attention was absorbed, as Mr. Godfrey’s attention had been
absorbed, by this beautiful work of Indian art. He too was aroused from
his studies by a tawny naked arm round his throat, by a bandage over his
eyes, and by a gag in his mouth. He too was thrown prostrate and
searched to the skin. A longer interval had then elapsed than had passed
in the experience of Mr. Godfrey; but it had ended as before, in the
persons of the house suspecting something wrong, and going up-stairs to
see what had happened. Precisely the same explanation which the landlord
in Northumberland Street had given to Mr. Godfrey, the landlord in
Alfred Place now gave to Mr. Luker. Both had been imposed on in the same
way by the plausible address and well-filled purse of the respectable
stranger, who introduced himself as acting for his foreign friends. The
one point of difference between the two cases occurred when the
scattered contents of Mr. Luker’s pockets were being collected from the
floor. His watch and purse were safe, but (less fortunate than
Mr. Godfrey) one of the loose papers that he carried about him had been
taken away. The paper in question acknowledged the receipt of a valuable
of great price which Mr. Luker had that day left in the care of his
bankers. This document would be useless for purposes of fraud, inasmuch
as it provided that the valuable should only be given up on the personal
application of the owner. As soon as he recovered himself, Mr. Luker
hurried to the bank, on the chance that the thieves who had robbed him
might ignorantly present themselves with the receipt. Nothing had been
seen of them when he arrived at the establishment, and nothing was seen
of them afterwards. Their respectable English friend had (in the opinion
of the bankers) looked the receipt over before they attempted to make
use of it, and had given them the necessary warning in good time.

Information of both outrages was communicated to the police, and the
needful investigations were pursued, I believe, with great energy. The
authorities held that a robbery had been planned, on insufficient
information received by the thieves. They had been plainly not sure
whether Mr. Luker had, or had not, trusted the transmission of his
precious gem to another person; and poor polite Mr. Godfrey had paid the
penalty of having been seen accidentally speaking to him. Add to this,
that Mr. Godfrey’s absence from our Monday evening meeting had been
occasioned by a consultation of the authorities, at which he was
requested to assist–and all the explanations required being now given, I
may proceed with the simpler story of my own little personal experiences
in Montagu Square.

I was punctual to the luncheon hour on Tuesday. Reference to my diary
shows this to have been a chequered day–much in it to be devoutly
regretted, much in it to be devoutly thankful for.

Dear Aunt Verinder received me with her usual grace and kindness. But I
noticed, after a little while, that something was wrong. Certain anxious
looks escaped my aunt, all of which took the direction of her daughter.
I never see Rachel myself without wondering how it can be that so
insignificant-looking a person should be the child of such distinguished
parents as Sir John and Lady Verinder. On this occasion, however, she
not only disappointed–she really shocked me. There was an absence of all
lady-like restraint in her language and manner most painful to see. She
was possessed by some feverish excitement which made her distressingly
loud when she laughed, and sinfully wasteful and capricious in what she
ate and drank at lunch. I felt deeply for her poor mother, even before
the true state of the case had been confidentially made known to me.

Luncheon over, my aunt said: “Remember what the doctor told you, Rachel,
about quieting yourself with a book after taking your meals.”

“I’ll go into the library, mamma,” she answered. “But if Godfrey calls,
mind I am told of it. I am dying for more news of him, after his
adventure in Northumberland Street.” She kissed her mother on the
forehead, and looked my way. “Good-bye, Clack,” she said, carelessly.
Her insolence roused no angry feeling in me; I only made a private
memorandum to pray for her.

When we were left by ourselves, my aunt told me the whole horrible story
of the Indian Diamond, which, I am happy to know, it is not necessary to
repeat here. She did not conceal from me that she would have preferred
keeping silence on the subject. But when her own servants all knew of
the loss of the Moonstone, and when some of the circumstances had
actually found their way into the newspapers–when strangers were
speculating whether there was any connection between what had happened
at Lady Verinder’s country-house, and what had happened in
Northumberland Street and Alfred Place–concealment was not to be thought
of; and perfect frankness became a necessity as well as a virtue.

Some persons, hearing what I now heard, would have been probably
overwhelmed with astonishment. For my own part, knowing Rachel’s spirit
to have been essentially unregenerate from her childhood upwards, I was
prepared for whatever my aunt could tell me on the subject of her
daughter. It might have gone on from bad to worse till it ended in
Murder; and I should still have said to myself, The natural result! oh,
dear, dear, the natural result! The one thing that DID shock me was the
course my aunt had taken under the circumstances. Here surely was a case
for a clergyman, if ever there was one yet! Lady Verinder had thought
it a case for a physician. All my poor aunt’s early life had been passed
in her father’s godless household. The natural result again! Oh, dear,
dear, the natural result again!

“The doctors recommend plenty of exercise and amusement for Rachel, and
strongly urge me to keep her mind as much as possible from dwelling on
the past,” said Lady Verinder.

“Oh, what heathen advice!” I thought to myself. “In this Christian
country, what heathen advice!”

My aunt went on, “I do my best to carry out my instructions. But this
strange adventure of Godfrey’s happens at a most unfortunate time.
Rachel has been incessantly restless and excited since she first heard
of it. She left me no peace till I had written and asked my nephew
Ablewhite to come here. She even feels an interest in the other person
who was roughly used–Mr. Luker, or some such name–though the man is, of
course, a total stranger to her.”

“Your knowledge of the world, dear aunt, is superior to mine,” I
suggested diffidently. “But there must be a reason surely for this
extraordinary conduct on Rachel’s part. She is keeping a sinful secret
from you and from everybody. May there not be something in these recent
events which threatens her secret with discovery?”

“Discovery?” repeated my aunt. “What can you possibly mean? Discovery
through Mr. Luker? Discovery through my nephew?”

As the word passed her lips, a special providence occurred. The servant
opened the door, and announced Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

### Chapter II

Mr. Godfrey followed the announcement of his name–as Mr. Godfrey does
everything else–exactly at the right time. He was not so close on the
servant’s heels as to startle us. He was not so far behind as to cause
us the double inconvenience of a pause and an open door. It is in the
completeness of his daily life that the true Christian appears. This
dear man was very complete.

“Go to Miss Verinder,” said my aunt, addressing the servant, “and tell
her Mr. Ablewhite is here.”

We both inquired after his health. We both asked him together whether he
felt like himself again, after his terrible adventure of the past week.
With perfect tact, he contrived to answer us at the same moment. Lady
Verinder had his reply in words. I had his charming smile.

“What,” he cried, with infinite tenderness, “have I done to deserve all
this sympathy? My dear aunt! my dear Miss Clack! I have merely been
mistaken for somebody else. I have only been blindfolded; I have only
been strangled; I have only been thrown flat on my back, on a very thin
carpet, covering a particularly hard floor. Just think how much worse it
might have been! I might have been murdered; I might have been robbed.
What have I lost? Nothing but Nervous Force–which the law doesn’t
recognise as property; so that, strictly speaking, I have lost nothing
at all. If I could have had my own way, I would have kept my adventure
to myself–I shrink from all this fuss and publicity. But Mr. Luker made
HIS injuries public, and my injuries, as the necessary consequence, have
been proclaimed in their turn. I have become the property of the
newspapers, until the gentle reader gets sick of the subject. I am very
sick indeed of it myself. May the gentle reader soon be like me! And
how is dear Rachel? Still enjoying the gaieties of London? So glad to
hear it! Miss Clack, I need all your indulgence. I am sadly behind-hand
with my Committee Work and my dear Ladies. But I really do hope to look
in at the Mothers’-Small-Clothes next week. Did you make cheering
progress at Monday’s Committee? Was the Board hopeful about future
prospects? And are we nicely off for Trousers?”

The heavenly gentleness of his smile made his apologies irresistible.
The richness of his deep voice added its own indescribable charm to the
interesting business question which he had just addressed to me. In
truth, we were almost TOO nicely off for Trousers; we were quite
overwhelmed by them. I was just about to say so, when the door opened
again, and an element of worldly disturbance entered the room, in the
person of Miss Verinder.

She approached dear Mr. Godfrey at a most unladylike rate of speed, with
her hair shockingly untidy, and her face, what I should call,
unbecomingly flushed.

“I am charmed to see you, Godfrey,” she said, addressing him, I grieve
to add, in the off-hand manner of one young man talking to another. “I
wish you had brought Mr. Luker with you. You and he (as long as our
present excitement lasts) are the two most interesting men in all
London. It’s morbid to say this; it’s unhealthy; it’s all that a
well-regulated mind like Miss Clack’s most instinctively shudders at.
Never mind that. Tell me the whole of the Northumberland Street story
directly. I know the newspapers have left some of it out.”

Even dear Mr. Godfrey partakes of the fallen nature which we all inherit
from Adam–it is a very small share of our human legacy, but, alas! he
has it. I confess it grieved me to see him take Rachel’s hand in both of
his own hands, and lay it softly on the left side of his waistcoat. It
was a direct encouragement to her reckless way of talking, and her
insolent reference to me.

“Dearest Rachel,” he said, in the same voice which had thrilled me when
he spoke of our prospects and our trousers, “the newspapers have told
you everything–and they have told it much better than I can.”

“Godfrey thinks we all make too much of the matter,” my aunt remarked.
“He has just been saying that he doesn’t care to speak of it.”

“Why?”

She put the question with a sudden flash in her eyes, and a sudden look
up into Mr. Godfrey’s face. On his side, he looked down at her with an
indulgence so injudicious and so ill-deserved, that I really felt called
on to interfere.

“Rachel, darling!” I remonstrated gently, “true greatness and true
courage are ever modest.”

“You are a very good fellow in your way, Godfrey,” she said–not taking
the smallest notice, observe, of me, and still speaking to her cousin as
if she was one young man addressing another. “But I am quite sure you
are not great; I don’t believe you possess any extraordinary courage;
and I am firmly persuaded–if you ever had any modesty–that your
lady-worshippers relieved you of that virtue a good many years since.
You have some private reason for not talking of your adventure in
Northumberland Street; and I mean to know it.”

“My reason is the simplest imaginable, and the most easily
acknowledged,” he answered, still bearing with her. “I am tired of the
subject.”

“You are tired of the subject? My dear Godfrey, I am going to make a
remark.”

“What is it?”

“You live a great deal too much in the society of women. And you have
contracted two very bad habits in consequence. You have learnt to talk
nonsense seriously, and you have got into a way of telling fibs for the
pleasure of telling them. You can’t go straight with your
lady-worshippers. I mean to make you go straight with me. Come, and sit
down. I am brimful of downright questions; and I expect you to be
brimful of downright answers.”

She actually dragged him across the room to a chair by the window, where
the light would fall on his face. I deeply feel being obliged to report
such language, and to describe such conduct. But, hemmed in, as I am,
between Mr. Franklin Blake’s cheque on one side and my own sacred regard
for truth on the other, what am I to do? I looked at my aunt. She sat
unmoved; apparently in no way disposed to interfere. I had never noticed
this kind of torpor in her before. It was, perhaps, the reaction after
the trying time she had had in the country. Not a pleasant symptom to
remark, be it what it might, at dear Lady Verinder’s age, and with dear
Lady Verinder’s autumnal exuberance of figure.

In the meantime, Rachel had settled herself at the window with our
amiable and forbearing–our too forbearing–Mr. Godfrey. She began the
string of questions with which she had threatened him, taking no more
notice of her mother, or of myself, than if we had not been in the room.

“Have the police done anything, Godfrey?”

“Nothing whatever.”

“It is certain, I suppose, that the three men who laid the trap for you
were the same three men who afterwards laid the trap for Mr. Luker?”

“Humanly speaking, my dear Rachel, there can be no doubt of it.”

“And not a trace of them has been discovered?”

“Not a trace.”

“It is thought–is it not?–that these three men are the three Indians who
came to our house in the country.”

“Some people think so.”

“Do you think so?”

“My dear Rachel, they blindfolded me before I could see their faces. I
know nothing whatever of the matter. How can I offer an opinion on it?”

Even the angelic gentleness of Mr. Godfrey was, you see, beginning to
give way at last under the persecution inflicted on him. Whether
unbridled curiosity, or ungovernable dread, dictated Miss Verinder’s
questions I do not presume to inquire. I only report that, on
Mr. Godfrey’s attempting to rise, after giving her the answer just
described, she actually took him by the two shoulders, and pushed him
back into his chair–Oh, don’t say this was immodest! don’t even hint
that the recklessness of guilty terror could alone account for such
conduct as I have described! We must not judge others. My Christian
friends, indeed, indeed, indeed, we must not judge others!

She went on with her questions, unabashed. Earnest Biblical students
will perhaps be reminded–as I was reminded–of the blinded children of
the devil, who went on with their orgies, unabashed, in the time before
the Flood.

“I want to know something about Mr. Luker, Godfrey.”

“I am again unfortunate, Rachel. No man knows less of Mr. Luker than I
do.”

“You never saw him before you and he met accidentally at the bank?”

“Never.”

“You have seen him since?”

“Yes. We have been examined together, as well as separately, to assist
the police.”

“Mr. Luker was robbed of a receipt which he had got from his
banker’s–was he not? What was the receipt for?”

“For a valuable gem which he had placed in the safe keeping of the
bank.”

“That’s what the newspapers say. It may be enough for the general
reader; but it is not enough for me. The banker’s receipt must have
mentioned what the gem was?”

“The banker’s receipt, Rachel–as I have heard it described–mentioned
nothing of the kind. A valuable gem, belonging to Mr. Luker; deposited
by Mr. Luker; sealed with Mr. Luker’s seal; and only to be given up on
Mr. Luker’s personal application. That was the form, and that is all I
know about it.”

She waited a moment, after he had said that. She looked at her mother,
and sighed. She looked back again at Mr. Godfrey, and went on.

“Some of our private affairs, at home,” she said, “seem to have got into
the newspapers?”

“I grieve to say, it is so.”

“And some idle people, perfect strangers to us, are trying to trace a
connexion between what happened at our house in Yorkshire and what has
happened since, here in London?”

“The public curiosity, in certain quarters, is, I fear, taking that
turn.”

“The people who say that the three unknown men who ill-used you and
Mr. Luker are the three Indians, also say that the valuable gem—-”

There she stopped. She had become gradually, within the last few
moments, whiter and whiter in the face. The extraordinary blackness of
her hair made this paleness, by contrast, so ghastly to look at, that we
all thought she would faint, at the moment when she checked herself in
the middle of her question. Dear Mr. Godfrey made a second attempt to
leave his chair. My aunt entreated her to say no more. I followed my
aunt with a modest medicinal peace-offering, in the shape of a bottle of
salts. We none of us produced the slightest effect on her. “Godfrey,
stay where you are. Mamma, there is not the least reason to be alarmed
about me. Clack, you’re dying to hear the end of it–I won’t faint,
expressly to oblige YOU.”

Those were the exact words she used–taken down in my diary the moment I
got home. But, oh, don’t let us judge! My Christian friends, don’t let
us judge!

She turned once more to Mr. Godfrey. With an obstinacy dreadful to see,
she went back again to the place where she had checked herself, and
completed her question in these words:

“I spoke to you, a minute since, about what people were saying in
certain quarters. Tell me plainly, Godfrey, do they any of them say that
Mr. Luker’s valuable gem is–the Moonstone?”

As the name of the Indian Diamond passed her lips, I saw a change come
over my admirable friend. His complexion deepened. He lost the genial
suavity of manner which is one of his greatest charms. A noble
indignation inspired his reply.

“They DO say it,” he answered. “There are people who don’t hesitate to
accuse Mr. Luker of telling a falsehood to serve some private interests
of his own. He has over and over again solemnly declared that, until
this scandal assailed him, he had never even heard of the Moonstone. And
these vile people reply, without a shadow of proof to justify them, He
has his reasons for concealment; we decline to believe him on his oath.
Shameful! shameful!”

Rachel looked at him very strangely–I can’t well describe how–while he
was speaking. When he had done, she said, “Considering that Mr. Luker is
only a chance acquaintance of yours, you take up his cause, Godfrey,
rather warmly.”

My gifted friend made her one of the most truly evangelical answers I
ever heard in my life.

“I hope, Rachel, I take up the cause of all oppressed people rather
warmly,” he said.

The tone in which those words were spoken might have melted a stone.
But, oh dear, what is the hardness of stone? Nothing, compared to the
hardness of the unregenerate human heart! She sneered. I blush to
record it–she sneered at him to his face.

“Keep your noble sentiments for your Ladies’ Committees, Godfrey. I am
certain that the scandal which has assailed Mr. Luker, has not spared
You.”

Even my aunt’s torpor was roused by those words.

“My dear Rachel,” she remonstrated, “you have really no right to say
that!”

“I mean no harm, mamma–I mean good. Have a moment’s patience with me,
and you will see.”

She looked back at Mr. Godfrey, with what appeared to be a sudden pity
for him. She went the length–the very unladylike length–of taking him by
the hand.

“I am certain,” she said, “that I have found out the true reason of your
unwillingness to speak of this matter before my mother and before me. An
unlucky accident has associated you in people’s minds with Mr. Luker.
You have told me what scandal says of HIM. What does scandal say of
you?”

Even at the eleventh hour, dear Mr. Godfrey–always ready to return good
for evil–tried to spare her.

“Don’t ask me!” he said. “It’s better forgotten, Rachel–it is, indeed.”

“I WILL hear it!” she cried out, fiercely, at the top of her voice.

“Tell her, Godfrey!” entreated my aunt. “Nothing can do her such harm
as your silence is doing now!”

Mr. Godfrey’s fine eyes filled with tears. He cast one last appealing
look at her–and then he spoke the fatal words:

“If you will have it, Rachel–scandal says that the Moonstone is in
pledge to Mr. Luker, and that I am the man who has pawned it.”

She started to her feet with a scream. She looked backwards and forwards
from Mr. Godfrey to my aunt, and from my aunt to Mr. Godfrey, in such a
frantic manner that I really thought she had gone mad.

“Don’t speak to me! Don’t touch me!” she exclaimed, shrinking back
from all of us (I declare like some hunted animal!) into a corner of
the room. “This is my fault! I must set it right. I have sacrificed
myself–I had a right to do that, if I liked. But to let an innocent man
be ruined; to keep a secret which destroys his character for life–Oh,
good God, it’s too horrible! I can’t bear it!”

My aunt half rose from her chair, then suddenly sat down again. She
called to me faintly, and pointed to a little phial in her work-box.

“Quick!” she whispered. “Six drops, in water. Don’t let Rachel see.”

Under other circumstances, I should have thought this strange. There was
no time now to think–there was only time to give the medicine. Dear
Mr. Godfrey unconsciously assisted me in concealing what I was about
from Rachel, by speaking composing words to her at the other end of the
room.

“Indeed, indeed, you exaggerate,” I heard him say. “My reputation stands
too high to be destroyed by a miserable passing scandal like this. It
will be all forgotten in another week. Let us never speak of it again.”
She was perfectly inaccessible, even to such generosity as this. She
went on from bad to worse.

“I must, and will, stop it,” she said. “Mamma! hear what I say. Miss
Clack! hear what I say. I know the hand that took the Moonstone. I
know–” she laid a strong emphasis on the words; she stamped her foot
in the rage that possessed her–“I KNOW THAT GODFREY ABLEWHITE IS
INNOCENT. Take me to the magistrate, Godfrey! Take me to the
magistrate, and I will swear it!”

My aunt caught me by the hand, and whispered, “Stand between us for a
minute or two. Don’t let Rachel see me.” I noticed a bluish tinge in her
face which alarmed me. She saw I was startled. “The drops will put me
right in a minute or two,” she said, and so closed her eyes, and waited
a little.

While this was going on, I heard dear Mr. Godfrey still gently
remonstrating.

“You must not appear publicly in such a thing as this,” he said. “YOUR
reputation, dearest Rachel, is something too pure and too sacred to be
trifled with.”

“MY reputation!” She burst out laughing. “Why, I am accused, Godfrey,
as well as you. The best detective officer in England declares that I
have stolen my own Diamond. Ask him what he thinks–and he will tell you
that I have pledged the Moonstone to pay my private debts!” She
stopped, ran across the room–and fell on her knees at her mother’s feet.
“Oh mamma! mamma! mamma! I must be mad–mustn’t I?–not to own the
truth NOW?” She was too vehement to notice her mother’s condition–she
was on her feet again, and back with Mr. Godfrey, in an instant. “I
won’t let you–I won’t let any innocent man–be accused and disgraced
through my fault. If you won’t take me before the magistrate, draw out a
declaration of your innocence on paper, and I will sign it. Do as I tell
you, Godfrey, or I’ll write it to the newspapers I’ll go out, and cry it
in the streets!”

We will not say this was the language of remorse–we will say it was the
language of hysterics. Indulgent Mr. Godfrey pacified her by taking a
sheet of paper, and drawing out the declaration. She signed it in a
feverish hurry. “Show it everywhere–don’t think of ME,” she said, as she
gave it to him. “I am afraid, Godfrey, I have not done you justice,
hitherto, in my thoughts. You are more unselfish–you are a better man
than I believed you to be. Come here when you can, and I will try and
repair the wrong I have done you.”

She gave him her hand. Alas, for our fallen nature! Alas, for
Mr. Godfrey! He not only forgot himself so far as to kiss her hand–he
adopted a gentleness of tone in answering her which, in such a case, was
little better than a compromise with sin. “I will come, dearest,” he
said, “on condition that we don’t speak of this hateful subject again.”
Never had I seen and heard our Christian Hero to less advantage than on
this occasion.

Before another word could be said by anybody, a thundering knock at the
street door startled us all. I looked through the window, and saw the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil waiting before the house–as typified in
a carriage and horses, a powdered footman, and three of the most
audaciously dressed women I ever beheld in my life.

Rachel started, and composed herself. She crossed the room to her
mother.

“They have come to take me to the flower-show,” she said. “One word,
mamma, before I go. I have not distressed you, have I?”

(Is the bluntness of moral feeling which could ask such a question as
that, after what had just happened, to be pitied or condemned? I like to
lean towards mercy. Let us pity it.)

The drops had produced their effect. My poor aunt’s complexion was like
itself again. “No, no, my dear,” she said. “Go with our friends, and
enjoy yourself.”

Her daughter stooped, and kissed her. I had left the window, and was
near the door, when Rachel approached it to go out. Another change had
come over her–she was in tears. I looked with interest at the momentary
softening of that obdurate heart. I felt inclined to say a few earnest
words. Alas! my well-meant sympathy only gave offence. “What do you
mean by pitying me?” she asked in a bitter whisper, as she passed to the
door. “Don’t you see how happy I am? I’m going to the flower-show,
Clack; and I’ve got the prettiest bonnet in London.” She completed the
hollow mockery of that address by blowing me a kiss–and so left the
room.

I wish I could describe in words the compassion I felt for this
miserable and misguided girl. But I am almost as poorly provided with
words as with money. Permit me to say–my heart bled for her.

Returning to my aunt’s chair, I observed dear Mr. Godfrey searching for
something softly, here and there, in different parts of the room. Before
I could offer to assist him he had found what he wanted. He came back to
my aunt and me, with his declaration of innocence in one hand, and with
a box of matches in the other.

“Dear aunt, a little conspiracy!” he said. “Dear Miss Clack, a pious
fraud which even your high moral rectitude will excuse! Will you leave
Rachel to suppose that I accept the generous self-sacrifice which has
signed this paper? And will you kindly bear witness that I destroy it in
your presence, before I leave the house?” He kindled a match, and,
lighting the paper, laid it to burn in a plate on the table. “Any
trifling inconvenience that I may suffer is as nothing,” he remarked,
“compared with the importance of preserving that pure name from the
contaminating contact of the world. There! We have reduced it to a
little harmless heap of ashes; and our dear impulsive Rachel will never
know what we have done! How do you feel? My precious friends, how do
you feel? For my poor part, I am as light-hearted as a boy!”

He beamed on us with his beautiful smile; he held out a hand to my aunt,
and a hand to me. I was too deeply affected by his noble conduct to
speak. I closed my eyes; I put his hand, in a kind of spiritual
self-forgetfulness, to my lips. He murmured a soft remonstrance. Oh the
ecstasy, the pure, unearthly ecstasy of that moment! I sat–I hardly
know on what–quite lost in my own exalted feelings. When I opened my
eyes again, it was like descending from heaven to earth. There was
nobody but my aunt in the room. He had gone.

I should like to stop here–I should like to close my narrative with the
record of Mr. Godfrey’s noble conduct. Unhappily there is more, much
more, which the unrelenting pecuniary pressure of Mr. Blake’s cheque
obliges me to tell. The painful disclosures which were to reveal
themselves in my presence, during that Tuesday’s visit to Montagu
Square, were not at an end yet.

Finding myself alone with Lady Verinder, I turned naturally to the
subject of her health; touching delicately on the strange anxiety which
she had shown to conceal her indisposition, and the remedy applied to
it, from the observation of her daughter.

My aunt’s reply greatly surprised me.

“Drusilla,” she said (if I have not already mentioned that my Christian
name is Drusilla, permit me to mention it now), “you are touching quite
innocently, I know–on a very distressing subject.”

I rose immediately. Delicacy left me but one alternative–the
alternative, after first making my apologies, of taking my leave. Lady
Verinder stopped me, and insisted on my sitting down again.

“You have surprised a secret,” she said, “which I had confided to my
sister Mrs. Ablewhite, and to my lawyer Mr. Bruff, and to no one else. I
can trust in their discretion; and I am sure, when I tell you the
circumstances, I can trust in yours. Have you any pressing engagement,
Drusilla? or is your time your own this afternoon?”

It is needless to say that my time was entirely at my aunt’s disposal.

“Keep me company then,” she said, “for another hour. I have something to
tell you which I believe you will be sorry to hear. And I shall have a
service to ask of you afterwards, if you don’t object to assist me.”

It is again needless to say that, so far from objecting, I was all
eagerness to assist her.

“You can wait here,” she went on, “till Mr. Bruff comes at five. And you
can be one of the witnesses, Drusilla, when I sign my Will.”

Her Will! I thought of the drops which I had seen in her work-box. I
thought of the bluish tinge which I had noticed in her complexion. A
light which was not of this world–a light shining prophetically from an
unmade grave–dawned on my mind. My aunt’s secret was a secret no longer.

### Chapter III

Consideration for poor Lady Verinder forbade me even to hint that I had
guessed the melancholy truth, before she opened her lips. I waited her
pleasure in silence; and, having privately arranged to say a few
sustaining words at the first convenient opportunity, felt prepared for
any duty that could claim me, no matter how painful it might be.

“I have been seriously ill, Drusilla, for some time past,” my aunt
began. “And, strange to say, without knowing it myself.”

I thought of the thousands and thousands of perishing human creatures
who were all at that moment spiritually ill, without knowing it
themselves. And I greatly feared that my poor aunt might be one of the
number. “Yes, dear,” I said, sadly. “Yes.”

“I brought Rachel to London, as you know, for medical advice,” she went
on. “I thought it right to consult two doctors.”

Two doctors! And, oh me (in Rachel’s state), not one clergyman! “Yes,
dear?” I said once more. “Yes?”

“One of the two medical men,” proceeded my aunt, “was a stranger to me.
The other had been an old friend of my husband’s, and had always felt a
sincere interest in me for my husband’s sake. After prescribing for
Rachel, he said he wished to speak to me privately in another room. I
expected, of course, to receive some special directions for the
management of my daughter’s health. To my surprise, he took me gravely
by the hand, and said, ‘I have been looking at you, Lady Verinder, with
a professional as well as a personal interest. You are, I am afraid, far
more urgently in need of medical advice than your daughter.’ He put some
questions to me, which I was at first inclined to treat lightly enough,
until I observed that my answers distressed him. It ended in his making
an appointment to come and see me, accompanied by a medical friend, on
the next day, at an hour when Rachel would not be at home. The result of
that visit–most kindly and gently conveyed to me–satisfied both the
physicians that there had been precious time lost, which could never be
regained, and that my case had now passed beyond the reach of their art.
For more than two years I have been suffering under an insidious form of
heart disease, which, without any symptoms to alarm me, has, by little
and little, fatally broken me down. I may live for some months, or I may
die before another day has passed over my head–the doctors cannot, and
dare not, speak more positively than this. It would be vain to say, my
dear, that I have not had some miserable moments since my real situation
has been made known to me. But I am more resigned than I was, and I am
doing my best to set my worldly affairs in order. My one great anxiety
is that Rachel should be kept in ignorance of the truth. If she knew it,
she would at once attribute my broken health to anxiety about the
Diamond, and would reproach herself bitterly, poor child, for what is in
no sense her fault. Both the doctors agree that the mischief began two,
if not three years since. I am sure you will keep my secret,
Drusilla–for I am sure I see sincere sorrow and sympathy for me in
your face.”

Sorrow and sympathy! Oh, what Pagan emotions to expect from a Christian
Englishwoman anchored firmly on her faith!

Little did my poor aunt imagine what a gush of devout thankfulness
thrilled through me as she approached the close of her melancholy story.
Here was a career of usefulness opened before me! Here was a beloved
relative and perishing fellow-creature, on the eve of the great change,
utterly unprepared; and led, providentially led, to reveal her situation
to Me! How can I describe the joy with which I now remembered that the
precious clerical friends on whom I could rely, were to be counted, not
by ones or twos, but by tens and twenties. I took my aunt in my arms–my
overflowing tenderness was not to be satisfied, now, with anything less
than an embrace. “Oh!” I said to her, fervently, “the indescribable
interest with which you inspire me! Oh! the good I mean to do you,
dear, before we part!” After another word or two of earnest prefatory
warning, I gave her her choice of three precious friends, all plying the
work of mercy from morning to night in her own neighbourhood; all
equally inexhaustible in exhortation; all affectionately ready to
exercise their gifts at a word from me. Alas! the result was far from
encouraging. Poor Lady Verinder looked puzzled and frightened, and met
everything I could say to her with the purely worldly objection that she
was not strong enough to face strangers. I yielded–for the moment only,
of course. My large experience (as Reader and Visitor, under not less,
first and last, than fourteen beloved clerical friends) informed me that
this was another case for preparation by books. I possessed a little
library of works, all suitable to the present emergency, all calculated
to arouse, convince, prepare, enlighten, and fortify my aunt. “You will
read, dear, won’t you?” I said, in my most winning way. “You will read,
if I bring you my own precious books? Turned down at all the right
places, aunt. And marked in pencil where you are to stop and ask
yourself, ‘Does this apply to me?’” Even that simple appeal–so
absolutely heathenising is the influence of the world–appeared to
startle my aunt. She said, “I will do what I can, Drusilla, to please
you,” with a look of surprise, which was at once instructive and
terrible to see. Not a moment was to be lost. The clock on the
mantel-piece informed me that I had just time to hurry home; to provide
myself with a first series of selected readings (say a dozen only); and
to return in time to meet the lawyer, and witness Lady Verinder’s Will.
Promising faithfully to be back by five o’clock, I left the house on my
errand of mercy.

When no interests but my own are involved, I am humbly content to get
from place to place by the omnibus. Permit me to give an idea of my
devotion to my aunt’s interests by recording that, on this occasion, I
committed the prodigality of taking a cab.

I drove home, selected and marked my first series of readings, and drove
back to Montagu Square, with a dozen works in a carpet-bag, the like of
which, I firmly believe, are not to be found in the literature of any
other country in Europe. I paid the cabman exactly his fare. He received
it with an oath; upon which I instantly gave him a tract. If I had
presented a pistol at his head, this abandoned wretch could hardly have
exhibited greater consternation. He jumped up on his box, and, with
profane exclamations of dismay, drove off furiously. Quite useless, I am
happy to say! I sowed the good seed, in spite of him, by throwing a
second tract in at the window of the cab.

The servant who answered the door–not the person with the cap-ribbons,
to my great relief, but the foot-man–informed me that the doctor had
called, and was still shut up with Lady Verinder. Mr. Bruff, the lawyer,
had arrived a minute since and was waiting in the library. I was shown
into the library to wait too.

Mr. Bruff looked surprised to see me. He is the family solicitor, and we
had met more than once, on previous occasions, under Lady Verinder’s
roof. A man, I grieve to say, grown old and grizzled in the service of
the world. A man who, in his hours of business, was the chosen prophet
of Law and Mammon; and who, in his hours of leisure, was equally capable
of reading a novel and of tearing up a tract.

“Have you come to stay here, Miss Clack?” he asked, with a look at my
carpet-bag.

To reveal the contents of my precious bag to such a person as this would
have been simply to invite an outburst of profanity. I lowered myself to
his own level, and mentioned my business in the house.

“My aunt has informed me that she is about to sign her Will,” I
answered. “She has been so good as to ask me to be one of the
witnesses.”

“Aye? aye? Well, Miss Clack, you will do. You are over twenty-one, and
you have not the slightest pecuniary interest in Lady Verinder’s Will.”

Not the slightest pecuniary interest in Lady Verinder’s Will. Oh, how
thankful I felt when I heard that! If my aunt, possessed of thousands,
had remembered poor Me, to whom five pounds is an object–if my name had
appeared in the Will, with a little comforting legacy attached to it–my
enemies might have doubted the motive which had loaded me with the
choicest treasures of my library, and had drawn upon my failing
resources for the prodigal expenses of a cab. Not the cruellest scoffer
of them all could doubt now. Much better as it was! Oh, surely, surely,
much better as it was!

I was aroused from these consoling reflections by the voice of
Mr. Bruff. My meditative silence appeared to weigh upon the spirits of
this worldling, and to force him, as it were, into talking to me against
his own will.

“Well, Miss Clack, what’s the last news in the charitable circles? How
is your friend Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, after the mauling he got from the
rogues in Northumberland Street? Egad! they’re telling a pretty story
about that charitable gentleman at my club!”

I had passed over the manner in which this person had remarked that I
was more than twenty-one, and that I had no pecuniary interest in my
aunt’s Will. But the tone in which he alluded to dear Mr. Godfrey was
too much for my forbearance. Feeling bound, after what had passed in my
presence that afternoon, to assert the innocence of my admirable friend,
whenever I found it called in question–I own to having also felt bound
to include in the accomplishment of this righteous purpose, a stinging
castigation in the case of Mr. Bruff.

“I live very much out of the world,” I said; “and I don’t possess the
advantage, sir, of belonging to a club. But I happen to know the story
to which you allude; and I also know that a viler falsehood than that
story never was told.”

“Yes, yes, Miss Clack–you believe in your friend. Natural enough.
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, won’t find the world in general quite so easy to
convince as a committee of charitable ladies. Appearances are dead
against him. He was in the house when the Diamond was lost. And he was
the first person in the house to go to London afterwards. Those are ugly
circumstances, ma’am, viewed by the light of later events.”

I ought, I know, to have set him right before he went any farther. I
ought to have told him that he was speaking in ignorance of a testimony
to Mr. Godfrey’s innocence, offered by the only person who was
undeniably competent to speak from a positive knowledge of the subject.
Alas! the temptation to lead the lawyer artfully on to his own
discomfiture was too much for me. I asked what he meant by “later
events”–with an appearance of the utmost innocence.

“By later events, Miss Clack, I mean events in which the Indians are
concerned,” proceeded Mr. Bruff, getting more and more superior to poor
Me, the longer he went on. “What do the Indians do, the moment they are
let out of the prison at Frizinghall? They go straight to London, and
fix on Mr. Luker. What follows? Mr. Luker feels alarmed for the safety
of ‘a valuable of great price,’ which he has got in the house. He lodges
it privately (under a general description) in his bankers’ strong-room.
Wonderfully clever of him: but the Indians are just as clever on their
side. They have their suspicions that the ‘valuable of great price’ is
being shifted from one place to another; and they hit on a singularly
bold and complete way of clearing those suspicions up. Whom do they
seize and search? Not Mr. Luker only–which would be intelligible
enough–but Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite as well. Why? Mr. Ablewhite’s
explanation is, that they acted on blind suspicion, after seeing him
accidentally speaking to Mr. Luker. Absurd! Half-a-dozen other people
spoke to Mr. Luker that morning. Why were they not followed home too,
and decoyed into the trap? No! no! The plain inference is, that
Mr. Ablewhite had his private interest in the ‘valuable’ as well as
Mr. Luker, and that the Indians were so uncertain as to which of the
two had the disposal of it, that there was no alternative but to search
them both. Public opinion says that, Miss Clack. And public opinion, on
this occasion, is not easily refuted.”

He said those last words, looking so wonderfully wise in his own worldly
conceit, that I really (to my shame be it spoken) could not resist
leading him a little farther still, before I overwhelmed him with the
truth.

“I don’t presume to argue with a clever lawyer like you,” I said. “But
is it quite fair, sir, to Mr. Ablewhite to pass over the opinion of the
famous London police officer who investigated this case? Not the shadow
of a suspicion rested upon anybody but Miss Verinder, in the mind of
Sergeant Cuff.”

“Do you mean to tell me, Miss Clack, that you agree with the Sergeant?”

“I judge nobody, sir, and I offer no opinion.”

“And I commit both those enormities, ma’am. I judge the Sergeant to have
been utterly wrong; and I offer the opinion that, if he had known
Rachel’s character as I know it, he would have suspected everybody in
the house but HER. I admit that she has her faults–she is secret, and
self-willed; odd and wild, and unlike other girls of her age. But true
as steel, and high-minded and generous to a fault. If the plainest
evidence in the world pointed one way, and if nothing but Rachel’s word
of honour pointed the other, I would take her word before the evidence,
lawyer as I am! Strong language, Miss Clack; but I mean it.”

“Would you object to illustrate your meaning, Mr. Bruff, so that I may
be sure I understand it? Suppose you found Miss Verinder quite
unaccountably interested in what has happened to Mr. Ablewhite and
Mr. Luker? Suppose she asked the strangest questions about this
dreadful scandal, and displayed the most ungovernable agitation when she
found out the turn it was taking?”

“Suppose anything you please, Miss Clack, it wouldn’t shake my belief in
Rachel Verinder by a hair’s-breadth.”

“She is so absolutely to be relied on as that?”

“So absolutely to be relied on as that.”

“Then permit me to inform you, Mr. Bruff, that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was
in this house not two hours since, and that his entire innocence of all
concern in the disappearance of the Moonstone was proclaimed by Miss
Verinder herself, in the strongest language I ever heard used by a young
lady in my life.”

I enjoyed the triumph–the unholy triumph, I fear I must admit–of seeing
Mr. Bruff utterly confounded and overthrown by a few plain words from
Me. He started to his feet, and stared at me in silence. I kept my seat,
undisturbed, and related the whole scene as it had occurred. “And what
do you say about Mr. Ablewhite now?” I asked, with the utmost possible
gentleness, as soon as I had done.

“If Rachel has testified to his innocence, Miss Clack, I don’t scruple
to say that I believe in his innocence as firmly as you do: I have been
misled by appearances, like the rest of the world; and I will make the
best atonement I can, by publicly contradicting the scandal which has
assailed your friend wherever I meet with it. In the meantime, allow me
to congratulate you on the masterly manner in which you have opened the
full fire of your batteries on me at the moment when I least expected
it. You would have done great things in my profession, ma’am, if you had
happened to be a man.”

With those words he turned away from me, and began walking irritably up
and down the room.

I could see plainly that the new light I had thrown on the subject had
greatly surprised and disturbed him. Certain expressions dropped from
his lips, as he became more and more absorbed in his own thoughts, which
suggested to my mind the abominable view that he had hitherto taken of
the mystery of the lost Moonstone. He had not scrupled to suspect dear
Mr. Godfrey of the infamy of stealing the Diamond, and to attribute
Rachel’s conduct to a generous resolution to conceal the crime. On Miss
Verinder’s own authority–a perfectly unassailable authority, as you are
aware, in the estimation of Mr. Bruff–that explanation of the
circumstances was now shown to be utterly wrong. The perplexity into
which I had plunged this high legal authority was so overwhelming that
he was quite unable to conceal it from notice. “What a case!” I heard
him say to himself, stopping at the window in his walk, and drumming on
the glass with his fingers. “It not only defies explanation, it’s even
beyond conjecture.”

There was nothing in these words which made any reply at all needful, on
my part–and yet, I answered them! It seems hardly credible that I
should not have been able to let Mr. Bruff alone, even now. It seems
almost beyond mere mortal perversity that I should have discovered, in
what he had just said, a new opportunity of making myself personally
disagreeable to him. But–ah, my friends! nothing is beyond mortal
perversity; and anything is credible when our fallen natures get the
better of us!

“Pardon me for intruding on your reflections,” I said to the
unsuspecting Mr. Bruff. “But surely there is a conjecture to make which
has not occurred to us yet.”

“Maybe, Miss Clack. I own I don’t know what it is.”

“Before I was so fortunate, sir, as to convince you of Mr. Ablewhite’s
innocence, you mentioned it as one of the reasons for suspecting him,
that he was in the house at the time when the Diamond was lost. Permit
me to remind you that Mr. Franklin Blake was also in the house at the
time when the Diamond was lost.”

The old worldling left the window, took a chair exactly opposite to
mine, and looked at me steadily, with a hard and vicious smile.

“You are not so good a lawyer, Miss Clack,” he remarked in a meditative
manner, “as I supposed. You don’t know how to let well alone.”

“I am afraid I fail to follow you, Mr. Bruff,” I said, modestly.

“It won’t do, Miss Clack–it really won’t do a second time. Franklin
Blake is a prime favourite of mine, as you are well aware. But that
doesn’t matter. I’ll adopt your view, on this occasion, before you have
time to turn round on me. You’re quite right, ma’am. I have suspected
Mr. Ablewhite, on grounds which abstractedly justify suspecting
Mr. Blake too. Very good–let’s suspect them together. It’s quite in his
character, we will say, to be capable of stealing the Moonstone. The
only question is, whether it was his interest to do so.”

“Mr. Franklin Blake’s debts,” I remarked, “are matters of family
notoriety.”

“And Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s debts have not arrived at that stage of
development yet. Quite true. But there happen to be two difficulties in
the way of your theory, Miss Clack. I manage Franklin Blake’s affairs,
and I beg to inform you that the vast majority of his creditors (knowing
his father to be a rich man) are quite content to charge interest on
their debts, and to wait for their money. There is the first
difficulty–which is tough enough. You will find the second tougher
still. I have it on the authority of Lady Verinder herself, that her
daughter was ready to marry Franklin Blake, before that infernal Indian
Diamond disappeared from the house. She had drawn him on and put him off
again, with the coquetry of a young girl. But she had confessed to her
mother that she loved cousin Franklin, and her mother had trusted cousin
Franklin with the secret. So there he was, Miss Clack, with his
creditors content to wait, and with the certain prospect before him of
marrying an heiress. By all means consider him a scoundrel; but tell me,
if you please, why he should steal the Moonstone?”

“The human heart is unsearchable,” I said gently. “Who is to fathom it?”

“In other words, ma’am–though he hadn’t the shadow of a reason for
taking the Diamond–he might have taken it, nevertheless, through natural
depravity. Very well. Say he did. Why the devil—-”

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Bruff. If I hear the devil referred to in that
manner, I must leave the room.”

“I beg YOUR pardon, Miss Clack–I’ll be more careful in my choice of
language for the future. All I meant to ask was this. Why–even supposing
he did take the Diamond–should Franklin Blake make himself the most
prominent person in the house in trying to recover it? You may tell me
he cunningly did that to divert suspicion from himself. I answer that he
had no need to divert suspicion–because nobody suspected him. He first
steals the Moonstone (without the slightest reason) through natural
depravity; and he then acts a part, in relation to the loss of the
jewel, which there is not the slightest necessity to act, and which
leads to his mortally offending the young lady who would otherwise have
married him. That is the monstrous proposition which you are driven to
assert, if you attempt to associate the disappearance of the Moonstone
with Franklin Blake. No, no, Miss Clack! After what has passed here
to-day, between us two, the dead-lock, in this case, is complete.
Rachel’s own innocence is (as her mother knows, and as I know) beyond
a doubt. Mr. Ablewhite’s innocence is equally certain–or Rachel would
never have testified to it. And Franklin Blake’s innocence, as you have
just seen, unanswerably asserts itself. On the one hand, we are morally
certain of all these things. And, on the other hand, we are equally sure
that somebody has brought the Moonstone to London, and that Mr. Luker,
or his banker, is in private possession of it at this moment. What is
the use of my experience, what is the use of any person’s experience, in
such a case as that? It baffles me; it baffles you, it baffles
everybody.”

No–not everybody. It had not baffled Sergeant Cuff. I was about to
mention this, with all possible mildness, and with every necessary
protest against being supposed to cast a slur upon Rachel–when the
servant came in to say that the doctor had gone, and that my aunt was
waiting to receive us.

This stopped the discussion. Mr. Bruff collected his papers, looking a
little exhausted by the demands which our conversation had made on him.
I took up my bag-full of precious publications, feeling as if I could
have gone on talking for hours. We proceeded in silence to Lady
Verinder’s room.

Permit me to add here, before my narrative advances to other events,
that I have not described what passed between the lawyer and me, without
having a definite object in view. I am ordered to include in my
contribution to the shocking story of the Moonstone a plain disclosure,
not only of the turn which suspicion took, but even of the names of the
persons on whom suspicion rested, at the time when the Indian Diamond
was believed to be in London. A report of my conversation in the library
with Mr. Bruff appeared to me to be exactly what was wanted to answer
this purpose–while, at the same time, it possessed the great moral
advantage of rendering a sacrifice of sinful self-esteem essentially
necessary on my part. I have been obliged to acknowledge that my fallen
nature got the better of me. In making that humiliating confession, I
get the better of my fallen nature. The moral balance is restored; the
spiritual atmosphere feels clear once more. Dear friends, we may go on
again.

### Chapter IV

The signing of the Will was a much shorter matter than I had
anticipated. It was hurried over, to my thinking, in indecent haste.
Samuel, the footman, was sent for to act as second witness–and the pen
was put at once into my aunt’s hand. I felt strongly urged to say a few
appropriate words on this solemn occasion. But Mr. Bruff’s manner
convinced me that it was wisest to check the impulse while he was in the
room. In less than two minutes it was all over–and Samuel (unbenefited
by what I might have said) had gone downstairs again.

Mr. Bruff folded up the Will, and then looked my way; apparently
wondering whether I did or did not mean to leave him alone with my aunt.
I had my mission of mercy to fulfil, and my bag of precious publications
ready on my lap. He might as well have expected to move St. Paul’s
Cathedral by looking at it, as to move Me. There was one merit about him
(due no doubt to his worldly training) which I have no wish to deny. He
was quick at seeing things. I appeared to produce almost the same
impression on him which I had produced on the cabman. HE too uttered a
profane expression, and withdrew in a violent hurry, and left me
mistress of the field.

As soon as we were alone, my aunt reclined on the sofa, and then
alluded, with some appearance of confusion, to the subject of her Will.

“I hope you won’t think yourself neglected, Drusilla,” she said. “I mean
to GIVE you your little legacy, my dear, with my own hand.”

Here was a golden opportunity! I seized it on the spot. In other words,
I instantly opened my bag, and took out the top publication. It proved
to be an early edition–only the twenty-fifth–of the famous anonymous
work (believed to be by precious Miss Bellows), entitled THE SERPENT AT
HOME. The design of the book–with which the worldly reader may not be
acquainted–is to show how the Evil One lies in wait for us in all the
most apparently innocent actions of our daily lives. The chapters best
adapted to female perusal are “Satan in the Hair Brush;” “Satan behind
the Looking Glass;” “Satan under the Tea Table;” "Satan out of the
Window’–and many others.

“Give your attention, dear aunt, to this precious book–and you will give
me all I ask.” With those words, I handed it to her open, at a marked
passage–one continuous burst of burning eloquence! Subject: Satan among
the Sofa Cushions.

Poor Lady Verinder (reclining thoughtlessly on her own sofa cushions)
glanced at the book, and handed it back to me looking more confused than
ever.

“I’m afraid, Drusilla,” she said, “I must wait till I am a little
better, before I can read that. The doctor—-”

The moment she mentioned the doctor’s name, I knew what was coming. Over
and over again in my past experience among my perishing
fellow-creatures, the members of the notoriously infidel profession of
Medicine had stepped between me and my mission of mercy–on the miserable
pretence that the patient wanted quiet, and that the disturbing
influence of all others which they most dreaded, was the influence of
Miss Clack and her Books. Precisely the same blinded materialism
(working treacherously behind my back) now sought to rob me of the only
right of property that my poverty could claim–my right of spiritual
property in my perishing aunt.

“The doctor tells me,” my poor misguided relative went on, “that I am
not so well to-day. He forbids me to see any strangers; and he orders
me, if I read at all, only to read the lightest and the most amusing
books. ‘Do nothing, Lady Verinder, to weary your head, or to quicken
your pulse’–those were his last words, Drusilla, when he left me
to-day.”

There was no help for it but to yield again–for the moment only, as
before. Any open assertion of the infinitely superior importance of such
a ministry as mine, compared with the ministry of the medical man, would
only have provoked the doctor to practise on the human weakness of his
patient, and to threaten to throw up the case. Happily, there are more
ways than one of sowing the good seed, and few persons are better versed
in those ways than myself.

“You might feel stronger, dear, in an hour or two,” I said. “Or you
might wake, to-morrow morning, with a sense of something wanting, and
even this unpretending volume might be able to supply it. You will let
me leave the book, aunt? The doctor can hardly object to that!”

I slipped it under the sofa cushions, half in, and half out, close by
her handkerchief, and her smelling-bottle. Every time her hand searched
for either of these, it would touch the book; and, sooner or later (who
knows?) the book might touch HER. After making this arrangement, I
thought it wise to withdraw. “Let me leave you to repose, dear aunt; I
will call again to-morrow.” I looked accidentally towards the window as
I said that. It was full of flowers, in boxes and pots. Lady Verinder
was extravagantly fond of these perishable treasures, and had a habit of
rising every now and then, and going to look at them and smell them. A
new idea flashed across my mind. “Oh! may I take a flower?” I said–and
got to the window unsuspected, in that way. Instead of taking away a
flower, I added one, in the shape of another book from my bag, which I
left, to surprise my aunt, among the geraniums and roses. The happy
thought followed, “Why not do the same for her, poor dear, in every
other room that she enters?” I immediately said good-bye; and, crossing
the hall, slipped into the library. Samuel, coming up to let me out, and
supposing I had gone, went down-stairs again. On the library table I
noticed two of the “amusing books” which the infidel doctor had
recommended. I instantly covered them from sight with two of my own
precious publications. In the breakfast-room I found my aunt’s favourite
canary singing in his cage. She was always in the habit of feeding the
bird herself. Some groundsel was strewed on a table which stood
immediately under the cage. I put a book among the groundsel. In the
drawing-room I found more cheering opportunities of emptying my bag. My
aunt’s favourite musical pieces were on the piano. I slipped in two more
books among the music. I disposed of another in the back drawing-room,
under some unfinished embroidery, which I knew to be of Lady Verinder’s
working. A third little room opened out of the back drawing-room, from
which it was shut off by curtains instead of a door. My aunt’s plain
old-fashioned fan was on the chimney-piece. I opened my ninth book at a
very special passage, and put the fan in as a marker, to keep the place.
The question then came, whether I should go higher still, and try the
bed-room floor–at the risk, undoubtedly, of being insulted, if the
person with the cap-ribbons happened to be in the upper regions of the
house, and to find me out. But oh, what of that? It is a poor Christian
that is afraid of being insulted. I went upstairs, prepared to bear
anything. All was silent and solitary–it was the servants’ tea-time, I
suppose. My aunt’s room was in front. The miniature of my late dear
uncle, Sir John, hung on the wall opposite the bed. It seemed to smile
at me; it seemed to say, “Drusilla! deposit a book.” There were tables
on either side of my aunt’s bed. She was a bad sleeper, and wanted, or
thought she wanted, many things at night. I put a book near the matches
on one side, and a book under the box of chocolate drops on the other.
Whether she wanted a light, or whether she wanted a drop, there was a
precious publication to meet her eye, or to meet her hand, and to say
with silent eloquence, in either case, “Come, try me! try me!” But one
book was now left at the bottom of my bag, and but one apartment was
still unexplored–the bath-room, which opened out of the bed-room. I
peeped in; and the holy inner voice that never deceives, whispered to
me, “You have met her, Drusilla, everywhere else; meet her at the bath,
and the work is done.” I observed a dressing-gown thrown across a chair.
It had a pocket in it, and in that pocket I put my last book. Can words
express my exquisite sense of duty done, when I had slipped out of the
house, unsuspected by any of them, and when I found myself in the street
with my empty bag under my arm? Oh, my worldly friends, pursuing the
phantom, Pleasure, through the guilty mazes of Dissipation, how easy it
is to be happy, if you will only be good!

When I folded up my things that night–when I reflected on the true
riches which I had scattered with such a lavish hand, from top to bottom
of the house of my wealthy aunt–I declare I felt as free from all
anxiety as if I had been a child again. I was so light-hearted that I
sang a verse of the Evening Hymn. I was so light-hearted that I fell
asleep before I could sing another. Quite like a child again! quite
like a child again!

So I passed that blissful night. On rising the next morning, how young I
felt! I might add, how young I looked, if I were capable of dwelling on
the concerns of my own perishable body. But I am not capable–and I add
nothing.

Towards luncheon time–not for the sake of the creature-comforts, but for
the certainty of finding dear aunt–I put on my bonnet to go to Montagu
Square. Just as I was ready, the maid at the lodgings in which I then
lived looked in at the door, and said, “Lady Verinder’s servant, to see
Miss Clack.”

I occupied the parlour-floor, at that period of my residence in London.
The front parlour was my sitting-room. Very small, very low in the
ceiling, very poorly furnished–but, oh, so neat! I looked into the
passage to see which of Lady Verinder’s servants had asked for me. It
was the young footman, Samuel–a civil fresh-coloured person, with a
teachable look and a very obliging manner. I had always felt a spiritual
interest in Samuel, and a wish to try him with a few serious words. On
this occasion, I invited him into my sitting-room.

He came in, with a large parcel under his arm. When he put the parcel
down, it appeared to frighten him. “My lady’s love, Miss; and I was to
say that you would find a letter inside.” Having given that message, the
fresh-coloured young footman surprised me by looking as if he would have
liked to run away.

I detained him to make a few kind inquiries. Could I see my aunt, if I
called in Montagu Square? No; she had gone out for a drive. Miss Rachel
had gone with her, and Mr. Ablewhite had taken a seat in the carriage,
too. Knowing how sadly dear Mr. Godfrey’s charitable work was in arrear,
I thought it odd that he should be going out driving, like an idle man.
I stopped Samuel at the door, and made a few more kind inquiries. Miss
Rachel was going to a ball that night, and Mr. Ablewhite had arranged to
come to coffee, and go with her. There was a morning concert advertised
for to-morrow, and Samuel was ordered to take places for a large party,
including a place for Mr. Ablewhite. “All the tickets may be gone,
Miss,” said this innocent youth, “if I don’t run and get them at
once!” He ran as he said the words–and I found myself alone again, with
some anxious thoughts to occupy me.

We had a special meeting of the Mothers’-Small-Clothes-Conversion
Society that night, summoned expressly with a view to obtaining
Mr. Godfrey’s advice and assistance. Instead of sustaining our
sisterhood, under an overwhelming flow of Trousers which quite
prostrated our little community, he had arranged to take coffee in
Montagu Square, and to goto a ball afterwards! The afternoon of the
next day had been selected for the Festival of the
British-Ladies’-Servants’-Sunday-Sweetheart-Supervision Society.
Instead of being present, the life and soul of that struggling
Institution, he had engaged to make one of a party of worldlings at a
morning concert! I asked myself what did it mean? Alas! it meant that
our Christian Hero was to reveal himself to me in a new character, and
to become associated in my mind with one of the most awful backslidings
of modern times.

To return, however, to the history of the passing day. On finding myself
alone in my room, I naturally turned my attention to the parcel which
appeared to have so strangely intimidated the fresh-coloured young
footman. Had my aunt sent me my promised legacy? and had it taken the
form of cast-off clothes, or worn-out silver spoons, or unfashionable
jewellery, or anything of that sort? Prepared to accept all, and to
resent nothing, I opened the parcel–and what met my view? The twelve
precious publications which I had scattered through the house, on the
previous day; all returned to me by the doctor’s orders! Well might the
youthful Samuel shrink when he brought his parcel into my room! Well
might he run when he had performed his miserable errand! As to my
aunt’s letter, it simply amounted, poor soul, to this–that she dare
not disobey her medical man.

What was to be done now? With my training and my principles, I never had
a moment’s doubt.

Once self-supported by conscience, once embarked on a career of manifest
usefulness, the true Christian never yields. Neither public nor private
influences produce the slightest effect on us, when we have once got our
mission. Taxation may be the consequence of a mission; riots may be the
consequence of a mission; wars may be the consequence of a mission: we
go on with our work, irrespective of every human consideration which
moves the world outside us. We are above reason; we are beyond ridicule;
we see with nobody’s eyes, we hear with nobody’s ears, we feel with
nobody’s hearts, but our own. Glorious, glorious privilege! And how is
it earned? Ah, my friends, you may spare yourselves the useless
inquiry! We are the only people who can earn it–for we are the only
people who are always right.

In the case of my misguided aunt, the form which pious perseverance was
next to take revealed itself to me plainly enough.

Preparation by clerical friends had failed, owing to Lady Verinder’s own
reluctance. Preparation by books had failed, owing to the doctor’s
infidel obstinacy. So be it! What was the next thing to try? The next
thing to try was–Preparation by Little Notes. In other words, the books
themselves having been sent back, select extracts from the books, copied
by different hands, and all addressed as letters to my aunt, were, some
to be sent by post, and some to be distributed about the house on the
plan I had adopted on the previous day. As letters they would excite no
suspicion; as letters they would be opened–and, once opened, might be
read. Some of them I wrote myself. “Dear aunt, may I ask your attention
to a few lines?” \&c. “Dear aunt, I was reading last night, and I
chanced on the following passage,” \&c. Other letters were written for
me by my valued fellow-workers, the sisterhood at the
Mothers’-Small-Clothes. “Dear madam, pardon the interest taken in you
by a true, though humble, friend.” “Dear madam, may a serious person
surprise you by saying a few cheering words?” Using these and other
similar forms of courteous appeal, we reintroduced all my precious
passages under a form which not even the doctor’s watchful materialism
could suspect. Before the shades of evening had closed around us, I had
a dozen awakening letters for my aunt, instead of a dozen awakening
books. Six I made immediate arrangements for sending through the post,
and six I kept in my pocket for personal distribution in the house the
next day.

Soon after two o’clock I was again on the field of pious conflict,
addressing more kind inquiries to Samuel at Lady Verinder’s door.

My aunt had had a bad night. She was again in the room in which I had
witnessed her Will, resting on the sofa, and trying to get a little
sleep.

I said I would wait in the library, on the chance of seeing her. In the
fervour of my zeal to distribute the letters, it never occurred to me to
inquire about Rachel. The house was quiet, and it was past the hour at
which the musical performance began. I took it for granted that she and
her party of pleasure-seekers (Mr. Godfrey, alas! included) were all at
the concert, and eagerly devoted myself to my good work, while time and
opportunity were still at my own disposal.

My aunt’s correspondence of the morning–including the six awakening
letters which I had posted overnight–was lying unopened on the library
table. She had evidently not felt herself equal to dealing with a large
mass of letters–and she might be daunted by the number of them, if she
entered the library later in the day. I put one of my second set of six
letters on the chimney-piece by itself; leaving it to attract her
curiosity, by means of its solitary position, apart from the rest. A
second letter I put purposely on the floor in the breakfast-room. The
first servant who went in after me would conclude that my aunt had
dropped it, and would be specially careful to restore it to her. The
field thus sown on the basement story, I ran lightly upstairs to scatter
my mercies next over the drawing-room floor.

Just as I entered the front room, I heard a double knock at the
street-door–a soft, fluttering, considerate little knock. Before I could
think of slipping back to the library (in which I was supposed to be
waiting), the active young footman was in the hall, answering the door.
It mattered little, as I thought. In my aunt’s state of health, visitors
in general were not admitted. To my horror and amazement, the performer
of the soft little knock proved to be an exception to general rules.
Samuel’s voice below me (after apparently answering some questions which
I did not hear) said, unmistakably, “Upstairs, if you please, sir.” The
next moment I heard footsteps–a man’s footsteps–approaching the
drawing-room floor. Who could this favoured male visitor possibly be?
Almost as soon as I asked myself the question, the answer occurred to
me. Who COULD it be but the doctor?

In the case of any other visitor, I should have allowed myself to be
discovered in the drawing-room. There would have been nothing out of the
common in my having got tired of the library, and having gone upstairs
for a change. But my own self-respect stood in the way of my meeting the
person who had insulted me by sending me back my books. I slipped into
the little third room, which I have mentioned as communicating with the
back drawing-room, and dropped the curtains which closed the open
doorway. If I only waited there for a minute or two, the usual result in
such cases would take place. That is to say, the doctor would be
conducted to his patient’s room.

I waited a minute or two, and more than a minute or two. I heard the
visitor walking restlessly backwards and forwards. I also heard him
talking to himself. I even thought I recognised the voice. Had I made a
mistake? Was it not the doctor, but somebody else? Mr. Bruff, for
instance? No! an unerring instinct told me it was not Mr. Bruff.
Whoever he was, he was still talking to himself. I parted the heavy
curtains the least little morsel in the world, and listened.

The words I heard were, “I’ll do it to-day!” And the voice that spoke
them was Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s.

### Chapter V

My hand dropped from the curtain. But don’t suppose–oh, don’t
suppose–that the dreadful embarrassment of my situation was the
uppermost idea in my mind! So fervent still was the sisterly interest I
felt in Mr. Godfrey, that I never stopped to ask myself why he was not
at the concert. No! I thought only of the words–the startling
words–which had just fallen from his lips. He would do it to-day. He
had said, in a tone of terrible resolution, he would do it to-day. What,
oh what, would he do? Something even more deplorably unworthy of him
than what he had done already? Would he apostatise from the faith? Would
he abandon us at the Mothers’-Small-Clothes? Had we seen the last of his
angelic smile in the committee-room? Had we heard the last of his
unrivalled eloquence at Exeter Hall? I was so wrought up by the bare
idea of such awful eventualities as these in connection with such a man,
that I believe I should have rushed from my place of concealment, and
implored him in the name of all the Ladies’ Committees in London to
explain himself–when I suddenly heard another voice in the room. It
penetrated through the curtains; it was loud, it was bold, it was
wanting in every female charm. The voice of Rachel Verinder.

“Why have you come up here, Godfrey?” she asked. “Why didn’t you go into
the library?”

He laughed softly, and answered, “Miss Clack is in the library.”

“Clack in the library!” She instantly seated herself on the ottoman in
the back drawing-room. “You are quite right, Godfrey. We had much better
stop here.”

I had been in a burning fever, a moment since, and in some doubt what to
do next. I became extremely cold now, and felt no doubt whatever. To
show myself, after what I had heard, was impossible. To retreat–except
into the fireplace–was equally out of the question. A martyrdom was
before me. In justice to myself, I noiselessly arranged the curtains so
that I could both see and hear. And then I met my martyrdom, with the
spirit of a primitive Christian.

“Don’t sit on the ottoman,” the young lady proceeded. “Bring a chair,
Godfrey. I like people to be opposite to me when I talk to them.”

He took the nearest seat. It was a low chair. He was very tall, and many
sizes too large for it. I never saw his legs to such disadvantage
before.

“Well?” she went on. “What did you say to them?”

“Just what you said, dear Rachel, to me.”

“That mamma was not at all well to-day? And that I didn’t quite like
leaving her to go to the concert?”

“Those were the words. They were grieved to lose you at the concert, but
they quite understood. All sent their love; and all expressed a cheering
belief that Lady Verinder’s indisposition would soon pass away.”

“YOU don’t think it’s serious, do you, Godfrey?”

“Far from it! In a few days, I feel quite sure, all will be well
again.”

“I think so, too. I was a little frightened at first, but I think so
too. It was very kind to go and make my excuses for me to people who are
almost strangers to you. But why not have gone with them to the concert?
It seems very hard that you should miss the music too.”

“Don’t say that, Rachel! If you only knew how much happier I am–here,
with you!”

He clasped his hands, and looked at her. In the position which he
occupied, when he did that, he turned my way. Can words describe how I
sickened when I noticed exactly the same pathetic expression on his
face, which had charmed me when he was pleading for destitute millions
of his fellow-creatures on the platform at Exeter Hall!

“It’s hard to get over one’s bad habits, Godfrey. But do try to get over
the habit of paying compliments–do, to please me.”

“I never paid you a compliment, Rachel, in my life. Successful love may
sometimes use the language of flattery, I admit. But hopeless love,
dearest, always speaks the truth.”

He drew his chair close, and took her hand, when he said “hopeless
love.” There was a momentary silence. He, who thrilled everybody, had
doubtless thrilled HER. I thought I now understood the words which had
dropped from him when he was alone in the drawing-room, “I’ll do it
to-day.” Alas! the most rigid propriety could hardly have failed to
discover that he was doing it now.

“Have you forgotten what we agreed on, Godfrey, when you spoke to me in
the country? We agreed that we were to be cousins, and nothing more.”

“I break the agreement, Rachel, every time I see you.”

“Then don’t see me.”

“Quite useless! I break the agreement every time I think of you. Oh,
Rachel! how kindly you told me, only the other day, that my place in
your estimation was a higher place than it had ever been yet! Am I mad
to build the hopes I do on those dear words? Am I mad to dream of some
future day when your heart may soften to me? Don’t tell me so, if I am!
Leave me my delusion, dearest! I must have THAT to cherish, and to
comfort me, if I have nothing else!”

His voice trembled, and he put his white handkerchief to his eyes.
Exeter Hall again! Nothing wanting to complete the parallel but the
audience, the cheers, and the glass of water.

Even her obdurate nature was touched. I saw her lean a little nearer to
him. I heard a new tone of interest in her next words.

“Are you really sure, Godfrey, that you are so fond of me as that?”

“Sure! You know what I was, Rachel. Let me tell you what I am. I have
lost every interest in life, but my interest in you. A transformation
has come over me which I can’t account for, myself. Would you believe
it? My charitable business is an unendurable nuisance to me; and when I
see a Ladies’ Committee now, I wish myself at the uttermost ends of the
earth!”

If the annals of apostasy offer anything comparable to such a
declaration as that, I can only say that the case in point is not
producible from the stores of my reading. I thought of the
Mothers’-Small-Clothes. I thought of the
Sunday-Sweetheart-Supervision. I thought of the other Societies, too
numerous to mention, all built up on this man as on a tower of strength.
I thought of the struggling Female Boards, who, so to speak, drew the
breath of their business-life through the nostrils of Mr. Godfrey–of
that same Mr. Godfrey who had just reviled our good work as a
“nuisance”–and just declared that he wished he was at the
uttermost ends of the earth when he found himself in our company! My
young female friends will feel encouraged to persevere, when I mention
that it tried even My discipline before I could devour my own righteous
indignation in silence. At the same time, it is only justice to myself
to add, that I didn’t lose a syllable of the conversation. Rachel was
the next to speak.

“You have made your confession,” she said. “I wonder whether it would
cure you of your unhappy attachment to me, if I made mine?”

He started. I confess I started too. He thought, and I thought, that she
was about to divulge the mystery of the Moonstone.

“Would you think, to look at me,” she went on, “that I am the
wretchedest girl living? It’s true, Godfrey. What greater wretchedness
can there be than to live degraded in your own estimation? That is my
life now.”

“My dear Rachel! it’s impossible you can have any reason to speak of
yourself in that way!”

“How do you know I have no reason?”

“Can you ask me the question! I know it, because I know you. Your
silence, dearest, has never lowered you in the estimation of your true
friends. The disappearance of your precious birthday gift may seem
strange; your unexplained connection with that event may seem stranger
still.”

“Are you speaking of the Moonstone, Godfrey—-”

“I certainly thought that you referred—-”

“I referred to nothing of the sort. I can hear of the loss of the
Moonstone, let who will speak of it, without feeling degraded in my own
estimation. If the story of the Diamond ever comes to light, it will be
known that I accepted a dreadful responsibility; it will be known that I
involved myself in the keeping of a miserable secret–but it will be as
clear as the sun at noon-day that I did nothing mean! You have
misunderstood me, Godfrey. It’s my fault for not speaking more plainly.
Cost me what it may, I will be plainer now. Suppose you were not in love
with me? Suppose you were in love with some other woman?”

“Yes?”

“Suppose you discovered that woman to be utterly unworthy of you?
Suppose you were quite convinced that it was a disgrace to you to waste
another thought on her? Suppose the bare idea of ever marrying such a
person made your face burn, only with thinking of it.”

“Yes?”

“And, suppose, in spite of all that–you couldn’t tear her from your
heart? Suppose the feeling she had roused in you (in the time when you
believed in her) was not a feeling to be hidden? Suppose the love this
wretch had inspired in you? Oh, how can I find words to say it in! How
can I make a MAN understand that a feeling which horrifies me at myself,
can be a feeling that fascinates me at the same time? It’s the breath of
my life, Godfrey, and it’s the poison that kills me–both in one! Go
away! I must be out of my mind to talk as I am talking now. No! you
mustn’t leave me–you mustn’t carry away a wrong impression. I must say
what is to be said in my own defence. Mind this! HE doesn’t know–he
never will know, what I have told you. I will never see him–I don’t care
what happens–I will never, never, never see him again! Don’t ask me his
name! Don’t ask me any more! Let’s change the subject. Are you doctor
enough, Godfrey, to tell me why I feel as if I was stifling for want of
breath? Is there a form of hysterics that bursts into words instead of
tears? I dare say! What does it matter? You will get over any trouble I
have caused you, easily enough now. I have dropped to my right place in
your estimation, haven’t I? Don’t notice me! Don’t pity me! For God’s
sake, go away!”

She turned round on a sudden, and beat her hands wildly on the back of
the ottoman. Her head dropped on the cushions; and she burst out crying.
Before I had time to feel shocked, at this, I was horror-struck by an
entirely unexpected proceeding on the part of Mr. Godfrey. Will it be
credited that he fell on his knees at her feet?–on BOTH knees, I
solemnly declare! May modesty mention that he put his arms round her
next? And may reluctant admiration acknowledge that he electrified her
with two words?

“Noble creature!”

No more than that! But he did it with one of the bursts which have made
his fame as a public speaker. She sat, either quite thunderstruck, or
quite fascinated–I don’t know which–without even making an effort to put
his arms back where his arms ought to have been. As for me, my sense of
propriety was completely bewildered. I was so painfully uncertain
whether it was my first duty to close my eyes, or to stop my ears, that
I did neither. I attribute my being still able to hold the curtain in
the right position for looking and listening, entirely to suppressed
hysterics. In suppressed hysterics, it is admitted, even by the doctors,
that one must hold something.

“Yes,” he said, with all the fascination of his evangelical voice and
manner, “you are a noble creature! A woman who can speak the truth, for
the truth’s own sake–a woman who will sacrifice her pride, rather than
sacrifice an honest man who loves her–is the most priceless of all
treasures. When such a woman marries, if her husband only wins her
esteem and regard, he wins enough to ennoble his whole life. You have
spoken, dearest, of your place in my estimation. Judge what that place
is–when I implore you on my knees, to let the cure of your poor wounded
heart be my care. Rachel! will you honour me, will you bless me, by
being my wife?”

By this time I should certainly have decided on stopping my ears, if
Rachel had not encouraged me to keep them open, by answering him in the
first sensible words I had ever heard fall from her lips.

“Godfrey!” she said, “you must be mad!”

“I never spoke more reasonably, dearest–in your interests, as well as in
mine. Look for a moment to the future. Is your happiness to be
sacrificed to a man who has never known how you feel towards him, and
whom you are resolved never to see again? Is it not your duty to
yourself to forget this ill-fated attachment? and is forgetfulness to be
found in the life you are leading now? You have tried that life, and you
are wearying of it already. Surround yourself with nobler interests than
the wretched interests of the world. A heart that loves and honours you;
a home whose peaceful claims and happy duties win gently on you day by
day–try the consolation, Rachel, which is to be found THERE! I don’t
ask for your love–I will be content with your affection and regard. Let
the rest be left, confidently left, to your husband’s devotion, and to
Time that heals even wounds as deep as yours.”

She began to yield already. Oh, what a bringing-up she must have had!
Oh, how differently I should have acted in her place!

“Don’t tempt me, Godfrey,” she said; “I am wretched enough and reckless
enough as it is. Don’t tempt me to be more wretched and more wreckless
still!”

“One question, Rachel. Have you any personal objection to me?”

“I! I always liked you. After what you have just said to me, I should
be insensible indeed if I didn’t respect and admire you as well.”

“Do you know many wives, my dear Rachel, who respect and admire their
husbands? And yet they and their husbands get on very well. How many
brides go to the altar with hearts that would bear inspection by the men
who take them there? And yet it doesn’t end unhappily–somehow or other
the nuptial establishment jogs on. The truth is, that women try marriage
as a Refuge, far more numerously than they are willing to admit; and,
what is more, they find that marriage has justified their confidence in
it. Look at your own case once again. At your age, and with your
attractions, is it possible for you to sentence yourself to a single
life? Trust my knowledge of the world–nothing is less possible. It is
merely a question of time. You may marry some other man, some years
hence. Or you may marry the man, dearest, who is now at your feet, and
who prizes your respect and admiration above the love of any other woman
on the face of the earth.”

“Gently, Godfrey! you are putting something into my head which I never
thought of before. You are tempting me with a new prospect, when all my
other prospects are closed before me. I tell you again, I am miserable
enough and desperate enough, if you say another word, to marry you on
your own terms. Take the warning, and go!”

“I won’t even rise from my knees, till you have said yes!”

“If I say yes you will repent, and I shall repent, when it is too
late!”

“We shall both bless the day, darling, when I pressed, and when you
yielded.”

“Do you feel as confidently as you speak?”

“You shall judge for yourself. I speak from what I have seen in my own
family. Tell me what you think of our household at Frizinghall. Do my
father and mother live unhappily together?”

“Far from it–so far as I can see.”

“When my mother was a girl, Rachel (it is no secret in the family), she
had loved as you love–she had given her heart to a man who was unworthy
of her. She married my father, respecting him, admiring him, but nothing
more. Your own eyes have seen the result. Is there no encouragement in
it for you and for me?”footnote:\[See Betteredge’s Narrative, chapter
viii.\]

“You won’t hurry me, Godfrey?”

“My time shall be yours.”

“You won’t ask me for more than I can give?”

“My angel! I only ask you to give me yourself.”

“Take me!”

In those two words she accepted him!

He had another burst–a burst of unholy rapture this time. He drew her
nearer and nearer to him till her face touched his; and then–No! I
really cannot prevail upon myself to carry this shocking disclosure any
farther. Let me only say, that I tried to close my eyes before it
happened, and that I was just one moment too late. I had calculated, you
see, on her resisting. She submitted. To every right-feeling person of
my own sex, volumes could say no more.

Even my innocence in such matters began to see its way to the end of the
interview now. They understood each other so thoroughly by this time,
that I fully expected to see them walk off together, arm in arm, to be
married. There appeared, however, judging by Mr. Godfrey’s next words,
to be one more trifling formality which it was necessary to observe. He
seated himself–unforbidden this time–on the ottoman by her side. “Shall
I speak to your dear mother?” he asked. “Or will you?”

She declined both alternatives.

“Let my mother hear nothing from either of us, until she is better. I
wish it to be kept a secret for the present, Godfrey. Go now, and come
back this evening. We have been here alone together quite long enough.”

She rose, and in rising, looked for the first time towards the little
room in which my martyrdom was going on.

“Who has drawn those curtains?” she exclaimed.

“The room is close enough, as it is, without keeping the air out of it
in that way.”

She advanced to the curtains. At the moment when she laid her hand on
them–at the moment when the discovery of me appeared to be quite
inevitable–the voice of the fresh-coloured young footman, on the stairs,
suddenly suspended any further proceedings on her side or on mine. It
was unmistakably the voice of a man in great alarm.

“Miss Rachel!” he called out, “where are you, Miss Rachel?”

She sprang back from the curtains, and ran to the door.

The footman came just inside the room. His ruddy colour was all gone. He
said, “Please to come down-stairs, Miss! My lady has fainted, and we
can’t bring her to again.”

In a moment more I was alone, and free to go down-stairs in my turn,
quite unobserved.

Mr. Godfrey passed me in the hall, hurrying out, to fetch the doctor.
“Go in, and help them!” he said, pointing to the room. I found Rachel
on her knees by the sofa, with her mother’s head on her bosom. One look
at my aunt’s face (knowing what I knew) was enough to warn me of the
dreadful truth. I kept my thoughts to myself till the doctor came in. It
was not long before he arrived. He began by sending Rachel out of the
room–and then he told the rest of us that Lady Verinder was no more.
Serious persons, in search of proofs of hardened scepticism, may be
interested in hearing that he showed no signs of remorse when he looked
at Me.

At a later hour I peeped into the breakfast-room, and the library. My
aunt had died without opening one of the letters which I had addressed
to her. I was so shocked at this, that it never occurred to me, until
some days afterwards, that she had also died without giving me my little
legacy.

### Chapter VI

(1.) “Miss Clack presents her compliments to Mr. Franklin Blake; and, in
sending him the fifth chapter of her humble narrative, begs to say that
she feels quite unequal to enlarge as she could wish on an event so
awful, under the circumstances, as Lady Verinder’s death. She has,
therefore, attached to her own manuscripts, copious Extracts from
precious publications in her possession, all bearing on this terrible
subject. And may those Extracts (Miss Clack fervently hopes) sound as
the blast of a trumpet in the ears of her respected kinsman,
Mr. Franklin Blake.”

(2.) “Mr. Franklin Blake presents his compliments to Miss Clack, and
begs to thank her for the fifth chapter of her narrative. In returning
the extracts sent with it, he will refrain from mentioning any personal
objection which he may entertain to this species of literature, and will
merely say that the proposed additions to the manuscript are not
necessary to the fulfilment of the purpose that he has in view.”

(3.) “Miss Clack begs to acknowledge the return of her Extracts. She
affectionately reminds Mr. Franklin Blake that she is a Christian, and
that it is, therefore, quite impossible for him to offend her. Miss C.
persists in feeling the deepest interest in Mr. Blake, and pledges
herself, on the first occasion when sickness may lay him low, to offer
him the use of her Extracts for the second time. In the meanwhile she
would be glad to know, before beginning the final chapters of her
narrative, whether she may be permitted to make her humble contribution
complete, by availing herself of the light which later discoveries have
thrown on the mystery of the Moonstone.”

(4.) “Mr. Franklin Blake is sorry to disappoint Miss Clack. He can only
repeat the instructions which he had the honour of giving her when she
began her narrative. She is requested to limit herself to her own
individual experience of persons and events, as recorded in her diary.
Later discoveries she will be good enough to leave to the pens of those
persons who can write in the capacity of actual witnesses.”

(5.) “Miss Clack is extremely sorry to trouble Mr. Franklin Blake with
another letter. Her Extracts have been returned, and the expression of
her matured views on the subject of the Moonstone has been forbidden.
Miss Clack is painfully conscious that she ought (in the worldly phrase)
to feel herself put down. But, no–Miss C. has learnt Perseverance in the
School of Adversity. Her object in writing is to know whether Mr. Blake
(who prohibits everything else) prohibits the appearance of the present
correspondence in Miss Clack’s narrative? Some explanation of the
position in which Mr. Blake’s interference has placed her as an
authoress, seems due on the ground of common justice. And Miss Clack, on
her side, is most anxious that her letters should be produced to speak
for themselves.”

(6.) “Mr. Franklin Blake agrees to Miss Clack’s proposal, on the
understanding that she will kindly consider this intimation of his
consent as closing the correspondence between them.”

(7.) “Miss Clack feels it an act of Christian duty (before the
correspondence closes) to inform Mr. Franklin Blake that his last
letter–evidently intended to offend her–has not succeeded in
accomplishing the object of the writer. She affectionately requests
Mr. Blake to retire to the privacy of his own room, and to consider
with himself whether the training which can thus elevate a poor weak
woman above the reach of insult, be not worthy of greater admiration
than he is now disposed to feel for it. On being favoured with an
intimation to that effect, Miss C. solemnly pledges herself to send back
the complete series of her Extracts to Mr. Franklin Blake.”

\[To this letter no answer was received. Comment is needless.

(Signed) DRUSILLA CLACK.\]

### Chapter VII

The foregoing correspondence will sufficiently explain why no choice is
left to me but to pass over Lady Verinder’s death with the simple
announcement of the fact which ends my fifth chapter.

Keeping myself for the future strictly within the limits of my own
personal experience, I have next to relate that a month elapsed from the
time of my aunt’s decease before Rachel Verinder and I met again. That
meeting was the occasion of my spending a few days under the same roof
with her. In the course of my visit, something happened, relative to her
marriage-engagement with Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, which is important
enough to require special notice in these pages. When this last of many
painful family circumstances has been disclosed, my task will be
completed; for I shall then have told all that I know, as an actual (and
most unwilling) witness of events.

My aunt’s remains were removed from London, and were buried in the
little cemetery attached to the church in her own park. I was invited to
the funeral with the rest of the family. But it was impossible (with my
religious views) to rouse myself in a few days only from the shock which
this death had caused me. I was informed, moreover, that the rector of
Frizinghall was to read the service. Having myself in past times seen
this clerical castaway making one of the players at Lady Verinder’s
whist-table, I doubt, even if I had been fit to travel, whether I should
have felt justified in attending the ceremony.

Lady Verinder’s death left her daughter under the care of her
brother-in-law, Mr. Ablewhite the elder. He was appointed guardian by
the will, until his niece married, or came of age. Under these
circumstances, Mr. Godfrey informed his father, I suppose, of the new
relation in which he stood towards Rachel. At any rate, in ten days from
my aunt’s death, the secret of the marriage-engagement was no secret at
all within the circle of the family, and the grand question for
Mr. Ablewhite senior–another confirmed castaway!–was how to make
himself and his authority most agreeable to the wealthy young lady who
was going to marry his son.

Rachel gave him some trouble at the outset, about the choice of a place
in which she could be prevailed upon to reside. The house in Montagu
Square was associated with the calamity of her mother’s death. The house
in Yorkshire was associated with the scandalous affair of the lost
Moonstone. Her guardian’s own residence at Frizinghall was open to
neither of these objections. But Rachel’s presence in it, after her
recent bereavement, operated as a check on the gaieties of her cousins,
the Miss Ablewhites–and she herself requested that her visit might be
deferred to a more favourable opportunity. It ended in a proposal,
emanating from old Mr. Ablewhite, to try a furnished house at Brighton.
His wife, an invalid daughter, and Rachel were to inhabit it together,
and were to expect him to join them later in the season. They would see
no society but a few old friends, and they would have his son Godfrey,
travelling backwards and forwards by the London train, always at their
disposal.

I describe this aimless flitting about from one place of residence to
another–this insatiate restlessness of body and appalling stagnation of
soul–merely with the view to arriving at results. The event which (under
Providence) proved to be the means of bringing Rachel Verinder and
myself together again, was no other than the hiring of the house at
Brighton.

My Aunt Ablewhite is a large, silent, fair-complexioned woman, with one
noteworthy point in her character. From the hour of her birth she has
never been known to do anything for herself. She has gone through life,
accepting everybody’s help, and adopting everybody’s opinions. A more
hopeless person, in a spiritual point of view, I have never met
with–there is absolutely, in this perplexing case, no obstructive
material to work upon. Aunt Ablewhite would listen to the Grand Lama of
Thibet exactly as she listens to Me, and would reflect his views quite
as readily as she reflects mine. She found the furnished house at
Brighton by stopping at an hotel in London, composing herself on a sofa,
and sending for her son. She discovered the necessary servants by
breakfasting in bed one morning (still at the hotel), and giving her
maid a holiday on condition that the girl “would begin enjoying herself
by fetching Miss Clack.” I found her placidly fanning herself in her
dressing-gown at eleven o’clock. “Drusilla, dear, I want some servants.
You are so clever–please get them for me.” I looked round the untidy
room. The church-bells were going for a week-day service; they suggested
a word of affectionate remonstrance on my part. “Oh, aunt!” I said
sadly. “Is THIS worthy of a Christian Englishwoman? Is the passage from
time to eternity to be made in THIS manner?” My aunt answered, “I’ll put
on my gown, Drusilla, if you will be kind enough to help me.” What was
to be said after that? I have done wonders with murderesses–I have never
advanced an inch with Aunt Ablewhite. “Where is the list,” I asked, “of
the servants whom you require?” My aunt shook her head; she hadn’t even
energy enough to keep the list. “Rachel has got it, dear,” she said, “in
the next room.” I went into the next room, and so saw Rachel again for
the first time since we had parted in Montagu Square.

She looked pitiably small and thin in her deep mourning. If I attached
any serious importance to such a perishable trifle as personal
appearance, I might be inclined to add that hers was one of those
unfortunate complexions which always suffer when not relieved by a
border of white next the skin. But what are our complexions and our
looks? Hindrances and pitfalls, dear girls, which beset us on our way to
higher things! Greatly to my surprise, Rachel rose when I entered the
room, and came forward to meet me with outstretched hand.

“I am glad to see you,” she said. “Drusilla, I have been in the habit of
speaking very foolishly and very rudely to you, on former occasions. I
beg your pardon. I hope you will forgive me.”

My face, I suppose, betrayed the astonishment I felt at this. She
coloured up for a moment, and then proceeded to explain herself.

“In my poor mother’s lifetime,” she went on, “her friends were not
always my friends, too. Now I have lost her, my heart turns for comfort
to the people she liked. She liked you. Try to be friends with me,
Drusilla, if you can.”

To any rightly-constituted mind, the motive thus acknowledged was simply
shocking. Here in Christian England was a young woman in a state of
bereavement, with so little idea of where to look for true comfort, that
she actually expected to find it among her mother’s friends! Here was a
relative of mine, awakened to a sense of her shortcomings towards
others, under the influence, not of conviction and duty, but of
sentiment and impulse! Most deplorable to think of–but, still,
suggestive of something hopeful, to a person of my experience in plying
the good work. There could be no harm, I thought, in ascertaining the
extent of the change which the loss of her mother had wrought in
Rachel’s character. I decided, as a useful test, to probe her on the
subject of her marriage-engagement to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

Having first met her advances with all possible cordiality, I sat by her
on the sofa, at her own request. We discussed family affairs and future
plans–always excepting that one future plan which was to end in her
marriage. Try as I might to turn the conversation that way, she
resolutely declined to take the hint. Any open reference to the
question, on my part, would have been premature at this early stage of
our reconciliation. Besides, I had discovered all I wanted to know. She
was no longer the reckless, defiant creature whom I had heard and seen,
on the occasion of my martyrdom in Montagu Square. This was, of itself,
enough to encourage me to take her future conversion in hand–beginning
with a few words of earnest warning directed against the hasty formation
of the marriage tie, and so getting on to higher things. Looking at her,
now, with this new interest–and calling to mind the headlong suddenness
with which she had met Mr. Godfrey’s matrimonial views–I felt the solemn
duty of interfering with a fervour which assured me that I should
achieve no common results. Rapidity of proceeding was, as I believed, of
importance in this case. I went back at once to the question of the
servants wanted for the furnished house.

“Where is the list, dear?”

Rachel produced it.

“Cook, kitchen-maid, housemaid, and footman,” I read. “My dear Rachel,
these servants are only wanted for a term–the term during which your
guardian has taken the house. We shall have great difficulty in finding
persons of character and capacity to accept a temporary engagement of
that sort, if we try in London. Has the house in Brighton been found
yet?”

“Yes. Godfrey has taken it; and persons in the house wanted him to hire
them as servants. He thought they would hardly do for us, and came back
having settled nothing.”

“And you have no experience yourself in these matters, Rachel?”

“None whatever.”

“And Aunt Ablewhite won’t exert herself?”

“No, poor dear. Don’t blame her, Drusilla. I think she is the only
really happy woman I have ever met with.”

“There are degrees in happiness, darling. We must have a little talk,
some day, on that subject. In the meantime I will undertake to meet the
difficulty about the servants. Your aunt will write a letter to the
people of the house—-”

“She will sign a letter, if I write it for her, which comes to the same
thing.”

“Quite the same thing. I shall get the letter, and I will go to Brighton
to-morrow.”

“How extremely kind of you! We will join you as soon as you are ready
for us. And you will stay, I hope, as my guest. Brighton is so lively;
you are sure to enjoy it.”

In those words the invitation was given, and the glorious prospect of
interference was opened before me.

It was then the middle of the week. By Saturday afternoon the house was
ready for them. In that short interval I had sifted, not the characters
only, but the religious views as well, of all the disengaged servants
who applied to me, and had succeeded in making a selection which my
conscience approved. I also discovered, and called on two serious
friends of mine, residents in the town, to whom I knew I could confide
the pious object which had brought me to Brighton. One of them–a
clerical friend–kindly helped me to take sittings for our little party
in the church in which he himself ministered. The other–a single lady,
like myself–placed the resources of her library (composed throughout of
precious publications) entirely at my disposal. I borrowed half-a-dozen
works, all carefully chosen with a view to Rachel. When these had been
judiciously distributed in the various rooms she would be likely to
occupy, I considered that my preparations were complete. Sound doctrine
in the servants who waited on her; sound doctrine in the minister who
preached to her; sound doctrine in the books that lay on her table–such
was the treble welcome which my zeal had prepared for the motherless
girl! A heavenly composure filled my mind, on that Saturday afternoon,
as I sat at the window waiting the arrival of my relatives. The giddy
throng passed and repassed before my eyes. Alas! how many of them felt
my exquisite sense of duty done? An awful question. Let us not pursue
it.

Between six and seven the travellers arrived. To my indescribable
surprise, they were escorted, not by Mr. Godfrey (as I had anticipated),
but by the lawyer, Mr. Bruff.

“How do you do, Miss Clack?” he said. “I mean to stay this time.”

That reference to the occasion on which I had obliged him to postpone
his business to mine, when we were both visiting in Montagu Square,
satisfied me that the old worldling had come to Brighton with some
object of his own in view. I had prepared quite a little Paradise for my
beloved Rachel–and here was the Serpent already!

“Godfrey was very much vexed, Drusilla, not to be able to come with us,”
said my Aunt Ablewhite. “There was something in the way which kept him
in town. Mr. Bruff volunteered to take his place, and make a holiday of
it till Monday morning. By-the-by, Mr. Bruff, I’m ordered to take
exercise, and I don’t like it. That,” added Aunt Ablewhite, pointing out
of window to an invalid going by in a chair on wheels, drawn by a man,
“is my idea of exercise. If it’s air you want, you get it in your
chair. And if it’s fatigue you want, I am sure it’s fatigue enough to
look at the man.”

Rachel stood silent, at a window by herself, with her eyes fixed on the
sea.

“Tired, love?” I inquired.

“No. Only a little out of spirits,” she answered. “I have often seen the
sea, on our Yorkshire coast, with that light on it. And I was thinking,
Drusilla, of the days that can never come again.”

Mr. Bruff remained to dinner, and stayed through the evening. The more I
saw of him, the more certain I felt that he had some private end to
serve in coming to Brighton. I watched him carefully. He maintained the
same appearance of ease, and talked the same godless gossip, hour after
hour, until it was time to take leave. As he shook hands with Rachel, I
caught his hard and cunning eyes resting on her for a moment with a
peculiar interest and attention. She was plainly concerned in the object
that he had in view. He said nothing out of the common to her or to
anyone on leaving. He invited himself to luncheon the next day, and then
he went away to his hotel.

It was impossible the next morning to get my Aunt Ablewhite out of her
dressing-gown in time for church. Her invalid daughter (suffering from
nothing, in my opinion, but incurable laziness, inherited from her
mother) announced that she meant to remain in bed for the day. Rachel
and I went alone together to church. A magnificent sermon was preached
by my gifted friend on the heathen indifference of the world to the
sinfulness of little sins. For more than an hour his eloquence (assisted
by his glorious voice) thundered through the sacred edifice. I said to
Rachel, when we came out, “Has it found its way to your heart, dear?”
And she answered, “No; it has only made my head ache.” This might have
been discouraging to some people; but, once embarked on a career of
manifest usefulness, nothing discourages Me.

We found Aunt Ablewhite and Mr. Bruff at luncheon. When Rachel declined
eating anything, and gave as a reason for it that she was suffering from
a headache, the lawyer’s cunning instantly saw, and seized, the chance
that she had given him.

“There is only one remedy for a headache,” said this horrible old man.
“A walk, Miss Rachel, is the thing to cure you. I am entirely at your
service, if you will honour me by accepting my arm.”

“With the greatest pleasure. A walk is the very thing I was longing
for.”

“It’s past two,” I gently suggested. “And the afternoon service, Rachel,
begins at three.”

“How can you expect me to go to church again,” she asked, petulantly,
“with such a headache as mine?”

Mr. Bruff officiously opened the door for her. In another minute more
they were both out of the house. I don’t know when I have felt the
solemn duty of interfering so strongly as I felt it at that moment. But
what was to be done? Nothing was to be done but to interfere at the
first opportunity, later in the day.

On my return from the afternoon service I found that they had just got
back. One look at them told me that the lawyer had said what he wanted
to say. I had never before seen Rachel so silent and so thoughtful. I
had never before seen Mr. Bruff pay her such devoted attention, and look
at her with such marked respect. He had (or pretended that he had) an
engagement to dinner that day–and he took an early leave of us all;
intending to go back to London by the first train the next morning.

“Are you sure of your own resolution?” he said to Rachel at the door.

“Quite sure,” she answered–and so they parted.

The moment his back was turned, Rachel withdrew to her own room. She
never appeared at dinner. Her maid (the person with the cap-ribbons) was
sent down-stairs to announce that her headache had returned. I ran up to
her and made all sorts of sisterly offers through the door. It was
locked, and she kept it locked. Plenty of obstructive material to work
on here! I felt greatly cheered and stimulated by her locking the door.

When her cup of tea went up to her the next morning, I followed it in. I
sat by her bedside and said a few earnest words. She listened with
languid civility. I noticed my serious friend’s precious publications
huddled together on a table in a corner. Had she chanced to look into
them?–I asked. Yes–and they had not interested her. Would she allow me
to read a few passages of the deepest interest, which had probably
escaped her eye? No, not now–she had other things to think of. She gave
these answers, with her attention apparently absorbed in folding and
refolding the frilling on her nightgown. It was plainly necessary to
rouse her by some reference to those worldly interests which she still
had at heart.

“Do you know, love,” I said, “I had an odd fancy, yesterday, about
Mr. Bruff? I thought, when I saw you after your walk with him, that he
had been telling you some bad news.”

Her fingers dropped from the frilling of her nightgown, and her fierce
black eyes flashed at me.

“Quite the contrary!” she said. “It was news I was interested in
hearing–and I am deeply indebted to Mr. Bruff for telling me of it.”

“Yes?” I said, in a tone of gentle interest.

Her fingers went back to the frilling, and she turned her head sullenly
away from me. I had been met in this manner, in the course of plying the
good work, hundreds of times. She merely stimulated me to try again. In
my dauntless zeal for her welfare, I ran the great risk, and openly
alluded to her marriage engagement.

“News you were interested in hearing?” I repeated. “I suppose, my dear
Rachel, that must be news of Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite?”

She started up in the bed, and turned deadly pale. It was evidently on
the tip of her tongue to retort on me with the unbridled insolence of
former times. She checked herself–laid her head back on the
pillow–considered a minute–and then answered in these remarkable
words:

“I SHALL NEVER MARRY MR. GODFREY ABLEWHITE.”

It was my turn to start at that.

“What can you possibly mean?” I exclaimed. “The marriage is considered
by the whole family as a settled thing!”

“Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite is expected here to-day,” she said doggedly.
“Wait till he comes–and you will see.”

“But my dear Rachel—-”

She rang the bell at the head of her bed. The person with the
cap-ribbons appeared.

“Penelope! my bath.”

Let me give her her due. In the state of my feelings at that moment, I
do sincerely believe that she had hit on the only possible way of
forcing me to leave the room.

By the mere worldly mind my position towards Rachel might have been
viewed as presenting difficulties of no ordinary kind. I had reckoned on
leading her to higher things by means of a little earnest exhortation on
the subject of her marriage. And now, if she was to be believed, no such
event as her marriage was to take place at all. But ah, my friends! a
working Christian of my experience (with an evangelising prospect before
her) takes broader views than these. Supposing Rachel really broke off
the marriage, on which the Ablewhites, father and son, counted as a
settled thing, what would be the result? It could only end, if she held
firm, in an exchanging of hard words and bitter accusations on both
sides. And what would be the effect on Rachel when the stormy interview
was over? A salutary moral depression would be the effect. Her pride
would be exhausted, her stubbornness would be exhausted, by the resolute
resistance which it was in her character to make under the
circumstances. She would turn for sympathy to the nearest person who had
sympathy to offer. And I was that nearest person–brimful of comfort,
charged to overflowing with seasonable and reviving words. Never had the
evangelising prospect looked brighter, to my eyes, than it looked now.

She came down to breakfast, but she ate nothing, and hardly uttered a
word.

After breakfast she wandered listlessly from room to room–then suddenly
roused herself, and opened the piano. The music she selected to play was
of the most scandalously profane sort, associated with performances on
the stage which it curdles one’s blood to think of. It would have been
premature to interfere with her at such a time as this. I privately
ascertained the hour at which Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was expected, and
then I escaped the music by leaving the house.

Being out alone, I took the opportunity of calling upon my two resident
friends. It was an indescribable luxury to find myself indulging in
earnest conversation with serious persons. Infinitely encouraged and
refreshed, I turned my steps back again to the house, in excellent time
to await the arrival of our expected visitor. I entered the dining-room,
always empty at that hour of the day, and found myself face to face with
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite!

He made no attempt to fly the place. Quite the contrary. He advanced to
meet me with the utmost eagerness.

“Dear Miss Clack, I have been only waiting to see you! Chance set me
free of my London engagements to-day sooner than I had expected, and I
have got here, in consequence, earlier than my appointed time.”

Not the slightest embarrassment encumbered his explanation, though this
was his first meeting with me after the scene in Montagu Square. He was
not aware, it is true, of my having been a witness of that scene. But he
knew, on the other hand, that my attendances at the Mothers’
Small-Clothes, and my relations with friends attached to other
charities, must have informed me of his shameless neglect of his Ladies
and of his Poor. And yet there he was before me, in full possession of
his charming voice and his irresistible smile!

“Have you seen Rachel yet?” I asked.

He sighed gently, and took me by the hand. I should certainly have
snatched my hand away, if the manner in which he gave his answer had not
paralysed me with astonishment.

“I have seen Rachel,” he said with perfect tranquillity. “You are aware,
dear friend, that she was engaged to me? Well, she has taken a sudden
resolution to break the engagement. Reflection has convinced her that
she will best consult her welfare and mine by retracting a rash promise,
and leaving me free to make some happier choice elsewhere. That is the
only reason she will give, and the only answer she will make to every
question that I can ask of her.”

“What have you done on your side?” I inquired. “Have you submitted.”

“Yes,” he said with the most unruffled composure, “I have submitted.”

His conduct, under the circumstances, was so utterly inconceivable, that
I stood bewildered with my hand in his. It is a piece of rudeness to
stare at anybody, and it is an act of indelicacy to stare at a
gentleman. I committed both those improprieties. And I said, as if in a
dream, “What does it mean?”

“Permit me to tell you,” he replied. “And suppose we sit down?”

He led me to a chair. I have an indistinct remembrance that he was very
affectionate. I don’t think he put his arm round my waist to support
me–but I am not sure. I was quite helpless, and his ways with ladies
were very endearing. At any rate, we sat down. I can answer for that, if
I can answer for nothing more.

### Chapter VIII

“I have lost a beautiful girl, an excellent social position, and a
handsome income,” Mr. Godfrey began; “and I have submitted to it without
a struggle. What can be the motive for such extraordinary conduct as
that? My precious friend, there is no motive.”

“No motive?” I repeated.

“Let me appeal, my dear Miss Clack, to your experience of children,” he
went on. “A child pursues a certain course of conduct. You are greatly
struck by it, and you attempt to get at the motive. The dear little
thing is incapable of telling you its motive. You might as well ask the
grass why it grows, or the birds why they sing. Well! in this matter, I
am like the dear little thing–like the grass–like the birds. I don’t
know why I made a proposal of marriage to Miss Verinder. I don’t know
why I have shamefully neglected my dear Ladies. I don’t know why I have
apostatised from the Mothers’ Small-Clothes. You say to the child, Why
have you been naughty? And the little angel puts its finger into its
mouth, and doesn’t know. My case exactly, Miss Clack! I couldn’t
confess it to anybody else. I feel impelled to confess it to YOU!”

I began to recover myself. A mental problem was involved here. I am
deeply interested in mental problems–and I am not, it is thought,
without some skill in solving them.

“Best of friends, exert your intellect, and help me,” he proceeded.
“Tell me–why does a time come when these matrimonial proceedings of
mine begin to look like something done in a dream? Why does it suddenly
occur to me that my true happiness is in helping my dear Ladies, in
going my modest round of useful work, in saying my few earnest words
when called on by my Chairman? What do I want with a position? I have
got a position! What do I want with an income? I can pay for my bread
and cheese, and my nice little lodging, and my two coats a year. What do
I want with Miss Verinder? She has told me with her own lips (this, dear
lady, is between ourselves) that she loves another man, and that her
only idea in marrying me is to try and put that other man out of her
head. What a horrid union is this! Oh, dear me, what a horrid union is
this! Such are my reflections, Miss Clack, on my way to Brighton. I
approach Rachel with the feeling of a criminal who is going to receive
his sentence. When I find that she has changed her mind too–when I hear
her propose to break the engagement–I experience (there is no sort of
doubt about it) a most overpowering sense of relief. A month ago I was
pressing her rapturously to my bosom. An hour ago, the happiness of
knowing that I shall never press her again, intoxicates me like strong
liquor. The thing seems impossible–the thing can’t be. And yet there are
the facts, as I had the honour of stating them when we first sat down
together in these two chairs. I have lost a beautiful girl, an excellent
social position, and a handsome income; and I have submitted to it
without a struggle. Can you account for it, dear friend? It’s quite
beyond ME.”

His magnificent head sank on his breast, and he gave up his own mental
problem in despair.

I was deeply touched. The case (if I may speak as a spiritual physician)
was now quite plain to me. It is no uncommon event, in the experience of
us all, to see the possessors of exalted ability occasionally humbled to
the level of the most poorly-gifted people about them. The object, no
doubt, in the wise economy of Providence, is to remind greatness that it
is mortal and that the power which has conferred it can also take it
away. It was now–to my mind–easy to discern one of these salutary
humiliations in the deplorable proceedings on dear Mr. Godfrey’s part,
of which I had been the unseen witness. And it was equally easy to
recognise the welcome reappearance of his own finer nature in the horror
with which he recoiled from the idea of a marriage with Rachel, and in
the charming eagerness which he showed to return to his Ladies and his
Poor.

I put this view before him in a few simple and sisterly words. His joy
was beautiful to see. He compared himself, as I went on, to a lost man
emerging from the darkness into the light. When I answered for a loving
reception of him at the Mothers’ Small-Clothes, the grateful heart of
our Christian Hero overflowed. He pressed my hands alternately to his
lips. Overwhelmed by the exquisite triumph of having got him back among
us, I let him do what he liked with my hands. I closed my eyes. I felt
my head, in an ecstasy of spiritual self-forgetfulness, sinking on his
shoulder. In a moment more I should certainly have swooned away in his
arms, but for an interruption from the outer world, which brought me to
myself again. A horrid rattling of knives and forks sounded outside the
door, and the footman came in to lay the table for luncheon.

Mr. Godfrey started up, and looked at the clock on the mantelpiece.

“How time flies with YOU!” he exclaimed. “I shall barely catch the
train.”

I ventured on asking why he was in such a hurry to get back to town. His
answer reminded me of family difficulties that were still to be
reconciled, and of family disagreements that were yet to come.

“I have heard from my father,” he said. “Business obliges him to leave
Frizinghall for London to-day, and he proposes coming on here, either
this evening or to-morrow. I must tell him what has happened between
Rachel and me. His heart is set on our marriage–there will be great
difficulty, I fear, in reconciling him to the breaking-off of the
engagement. I must stop him, for all our sakes, from coming here till he
IS reconciled. Best and dearest of friends, we shall meet again!”

With those words he hurried out. In equal haste on my side, I ran
upstairs to compose myself in my own room before meeting Aunt Ablewhite
and Rachel at the luncheon-table.

I am well aware–to dwell for a moment yet on the subject of
Mr. Godfrey–that the all-profaning opinion of the world has charged
him with having his own private reasons for releasing Rachel from her
engagement, at the first opportunity she gave him. It has also reached
my ears, that his anxiety to recover his place in my estimation has been
attributed in certain quarters, to a mercenary eagerness to make his
peace (through me) with a venerable committee-woman at the Mothers’
Small-Clothes, abundantly blessed with the goods of this world, and a
beloved and intimate friend of my own. I only notice these odious
slanders for the sake of declaring that they never had a moment’s
influence on my mind. In obedience to my instructions, I have exhibited
the fluctuations in my opinion of our Christian Hero, exactly as I find
them recorded in my diary. In justice to myself, let me here add that,
once reinstated in his place in my estimation, my gifted friend never
lost that place again. I write with the tears in my eyes, burning to say
more. But no–I am cruelly limited to my actual experience of persons and
things. In less than a month from the time of which I am now writing,
events in the money-market (which diminished even my miserable little
income) forced me into foreign exile, and left me with nothing but a
loving remembrance of Mr. Godfrey which the slander of the world has
assailed, and assailed in vain.

Let me dry my eyes, and return to my narrative.

I went downstairs to luncheon, naturally anxious to see how Rachel was
affected by her release from her marriage engagement.

It appeared to me–but I own I am a poor authority in such matters–that
the recovery of her freedom had set her thinking again of that other man
whom she loved, and that she was furious with herself for not being able
to control a revulsion of feeling of which she was secretly ashamed. Who
was the man? I had my suspicions–but it was needless to waste time in
idle speculation. When I had converted her, she would, as a matter of
course, have no concealments from Me. I should hear all about the man; I
should hear all about the Moonstone. If I had had no higher object in
stirring her up to a sense of spiritual things, the motive of relieving
her mind of its guilty secrets would have been enough of itself to
encourage me to go on.

Aunt Ablewhite took her exercise in the afternoon in an invalid chair.
Rachel accompanied her. “I wish I could drag the chair,” she broke out,
recklessly. “I wish I could fatigue myself till I was ready to drop.”

She was in the same humour in the evening. I discovered in one of my
friend’s precious publications–the Life, Letters, and Labours of Miss
Jane Ann Stamper, forty-fourth edition–passages which bore with a
marvellous appropriateness on Rachel’s present position. Upon my
proposing to read them, she went to the piano. Conceive how little she
must have known of serious people, if she supposed that my patience was
to be exhausted in that way! I kept Miss Jane Ann Stamper by me, and
waited for events with the most unfaltering trust in the future.

Old Mr. Ablewhite never made his appearance that night. But I knew the
importance which his worldly greed attached to his son’s marriage with
Miss Verinder–and I felt a positive conviction (do what Mr. Godfrey
might to prevent it) that we should see him the next day. With his
interference in the matter, the storm on which I had counted would
certainly come, and the salutary exhaustion of Rachel’s resisting powers
would as certainly follow. I am not ignorant that old Mr. Ablewhite has
the reputation generally (especially among his inferiors) of being a
remarkably good-natured man. According to my observation of him, he
deserves his reputation as long as he has his own way, and not a moment
longer.

The next day, exactly as I had foreseen, Aunt Ablewhite was as near to
being astonished as her nature would permit, by the sudden appearance of
her husband. He had barely been a minute in the house, before he was
followed, to MY astonishment this time, by an unexpected complication in
the shape of Mr. Bruff.

I never remember feeling the presence of the lawyer to be more unwelcome
than I felt it at that moment. He looked ready for anything in the way
of an obstructive proceeding–capable even of keeping the peace with
Rachel for one of the combatants!

“This is a pleasant surprise, sir,” said Mr. Ablewhite, addressing
himself with his deceptive cordiality to Mr. Bruff. “When I left your
office yesterday, I didn’t expect to have the honour of seeing you at
Brighton to-day.”

“I turned over our conversation in my mind, after you had gone,” replied
Mr. Bruff. “And it occurred to me that I might perhaps be of some use on
this occasion. I was just in time to catch the train, and I had no
opportunity of discovering the carriage in which you were travelling.”

Having given that explanation, he seated himself by Rachel. I retired
modestly to a corner–with Miss Jane Ann Stamper on my lap, in case of
emergency. My aunt sat at the window; placidly fanning herself as usual.
Mr. Ablewhite stood up in the middle of the room, with his bald head
much pinker than I had ever seen it yet, and addressed himself in the
most affectionate manner to his niece.

“Rachel, my dear,” he said, “I have heard some very extraordinary news
from Godfrey. And I am here to inquire about it. You have a sitting-room
of your own in this house. Will you honour me by showing me the way to
it?”

Rachel never moved. Whether she was determined to bring matters to a
crisis, or whether she was prompted by some private sign from Mr. Bruff,
is more than I can tell. She declined doing old Mr. Ablewhite the honour
of conducting him into her sitting-room.

“Whatever you wish to say to me,” she answered, “can be said here–in the
presence of my relatives, and in the presence” (she looked at Mr. Bruff)
“of my mother’s trusted old friend.”

“Just as you please, my dear,” said the amiable Mr. Ablewhite. He took a
chair. The rest of them looked at his face–as if they expected it, after
seventy years of worldly training, to speak the truth. I looked at the
top of his bald head; having noticed on other occasions that the temper
which was really in him had a habit of registering itself THERE.

“Some weeks ago,” pursued the old gentleman, “my son informed me that
Miss Verinder had done him the honour to engage herself to marry him. Is
it possible, Rachel, that he can have misinterpreted–or presumed
upon–what you really said to him?”

“Certainly not,” she replied. “I did engage myself to marry him.”

“Very frankly answered!” said Mr. Ablewhite. “And most satisfactory, my
dear, so far. In respect to what happened some weeks since, Godfrey has
made no mistake. The error is evidently in what he told me yesterday. I
begin to see it now. You and he have had a lovers’ quarrel–and my
foolish son has interpreted it seriously. Ah! I should have known
better than that at his age.”

The fallen nature in Rachel–the mother Eve, so to speak–began to chafe
at this.

“Pray let us understand each other, Mr. Ablewhite,” she said. “Nothing
in the least like a quarrel took place yesterday between your son and
me. If he told you that I proposed breaking off our marriage engagement,
and that he agreed on his side–he told you the truth.”

The self-registering thermometer at the top of Mr. Ablewhite’s bald head
began to indicate a rise of temper. His face was more amiable than
ever–but THERE was the pink at the top of his face, a shade deeper
already!

“Come, come, my dear!” he said, in his most soothing manner, “now don’t
be angry, and don’t be hard on poor Godfrey! He has evidently said some
unfortunate thing. He was always clumsy from a child–but he means well,
Rachel, he means well!”

“Mr. Ablewhite, I have either expressed myself very badly, or you are
purposely mistaking me. Once for all, it is a settled thing between your
son and myself that we remain, for the rest of our lives, cousins and
nothing more. Is that plain enough?”

The tone in which she said those words made it impossible, even for old
Mr. Ablewhite, to mistake her any longer. His thermometer went up
another degree, and his voice when he next spoke, ceased to be the voice
which is appropriate to a notoriously good-natured man.

“I am to understand, then,” he said, “that your marriage engagement is
broken off?”

“You are to understand that, Mr. Ablewhite, if you please.”

“I am also to take it as a matter of fact that the proposal to withdraw
from the engagement came, in the first instance, from YOU?”

“It came, in the first instance, from me. And it met, as I have told
you, with your son’s consent and approval.”

The thermometer went up to the top of the register. I mean, the pink
changed suddenly to scarlet.

“My son is a mean-spirited hound!” cried this furious old worldling.
“In justice to myself as his father–not in justice to HIM–I beg to ask
you, Miss Verinder, what complaint you have to make of Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite?”

Here Mr. Bruff interfered for the first time.

“You are not bound to answer that question,” he said to Rachel.

Old Mr. Ablewhite fastened on him instantly.

“Don’t forget, sir,” he said, “that you are a self-invited guest here.
Your interference would have come with a better grace if you had waited
until it was asked for.”

Mr. Bruff took no notice. The smooth varnish on HIS wicked old face
never cracked. Rachel thanked him for the advice he had given to her,
and then turned to old Mr. Ablewhite–preserving her composure in a
manner which (having regard to her age and her sex) was simply awful to
see.

“Your son put the same question to me which you have just asked,” she
said. “I had only one answer for him, and I have only one answer for
you. I proposed that we should release each other, because reflection
had convinced me that I should best consult his welfare and mine by
retracting a rash promise, and leaving him free to make his choice
elsewhere.”

“What has my son done?” persisted Mr. Ablewhite. “I have a right to know
that. What has my son done?”

She persisted just as obstinately on her side.

“You have had the only explanation which I think it necessary to give to
you, or to him,” she answered.

“In plain English, it’s your sovereign will and pleasure, Miss Verinder,
to jilt my son?”

Rachel was silent for a moment. Sitting close behind her, I heard her
sigh. Mr. Bruff took her hand, and gave it a little squeeze. She
recovered herself, and answered Mr. Ablewhite as boldly as ever.

“I have exposed myself to worse misconstruction than that,” she said.
“And I have borne it patiently. The time has gone by, when you could
mortify me by calling me a jilt.”

She spoke with a bitterness of tone which satisfied me that the scandal
of the Moonstone had been in some way recalled to her mind. “I have no
more to say,” she added, wearily, not addressing the words to anyone in
particular, and looking away from us all, out of the window that was
nearest to her.

Mr. Ablewhite got upon his feet, and pushed away his chair so violently
that it toppled over and fell on the floor.

“I have something more to say on my side,” he announced, bringing down
the flat of his hand on the table with a bang. “I have to say that if my
son doesn’t feel this insult, I do!”

Rachel started, and looked at him in sudden surprise.

“Insult?” she repeated. “What do you mean?”

“Insult!” reiterated Mr. Ablewhite. “I know your motive, Miss Verinder,
for breaking your promise to my son! I know it as certainly as if you
had confessed it in so many words. Your cursed family pride is insulting
Godfrey, as it insulted ME when I married your aunt. Her family–her
beggarly family–turned their backs on her for marrying an honest man,
who had made his own place and won his own fortune. I had no ancestors.
I wasn’t descended from a set of cut-throat scoundrels who lived by
robbery and murder. I couldn’t point to the time when the Ablewhites
hadn’t a shirt to their backs, and couldn’t sign their own names. Ha!
ha! I wasn’t good enough for the Herncastles, when I married. And now,
it comes to the pinch, my son isn’t good enough for YOU. I suspected it,
all along. You have got the Herncastle blood in you, my young lady! I
suspected it all along.”

“A very unworthy suspicion,” remarked Mr. Bruff. “I am astonished that
you have the courage to acknowledge it.”

Before Mr. Ablewhite could find words to answer in, Rachel spoke in a
tone of the most exasperating contempt.

“Surely,” she said to the lawyer, “this is beneath notice. If he can
think in THAT way, let us leave him to think as he pleases.”

From scarlet, Mr. Ablewhite was now becoming purple. He gasped for
breath; he looked backwards and forwards from Rachel to Mr. Bruff in
such a frenzy of rage with both of them that he didn’t know which to
attack first. His wife, who had sat impenetrably fanning herself up to
this time, began to be alarmed, and attempted, quite uselessly, to quiet
him. I had, throughout this distressing interview, felt more than one
inward call to interfere with a few earnest words, and had controlled
myself under a dread of the possible results, very unworthy of a
Christian Englishwoman who looks, not to what is meanly prudent, but to
what is morally right. At the point at which matters had now arrived, I
rose superior to all considerations of mere expediency. If I had
contemplated interposing any remonstrance of my own humble devising, I
might possibly have still hesitated. But the distressing domestic
emergency which now confronted me, was most marvellously and beautifully
provided for in the Correspondence of Miss Jane Ann Stamper–Letter one
thousand and one, on “Peace in Families.” I rose in my modest corner,
and I opened my precious book.

“Dear Mr. Ablewhite,” I said, “one word!”

When I first attracted the attention of the company by rising, I could
see that he was on the point of saying something rude to me. My sisterly
form of address checked him. He stared at me in heathen astonishment.

“As an affectionate well-wisher and friend,” I proceeded, “and as one
long accustomed to arouse, convince, prepare, enlighten, and fortify
others, permit me to take the most pardonable of all liberties–the
liberty of composing your mind.”

He began to recover himself; he was on the point of breaking out–he
WOULD have broken out, with anybody else. But my voice (habitually
gentle) possesses a high note or so, in emergencies. In this emergency,
I felt imperatively called upon to have the highest voice of the two.

I held up my precious book before him; I rapped the open page
impressively with my forefinger. “Not my words!” I exclaimed, in a
burst of fervent interruption. “Oh, don’t suppose that I claim attention
for My humble words! Manna in the wilderness, Mr. Ablewhite! Dew on
the parched earth! Words of comfort, words of wisdom, words of love–the
blessed, blessed, blessed words of Miss Jane Ann Stamper!”

I was stopped there by a momentary impediment of the breath. Before I
could recover myself, this monster in human form shouted out furiously,

“Miss Jane Ann Stamper be—-!”

It is impossible for me to write the awful word, which is here
represented by a blank. I shrieked as it passed his lips; I flew to my
little bag on the side table; I shook out all my tracts; I seized the
one particular tract on profane swearing, entitled, “Hush, for Heaven’s
Sake!”; I handed it to him with an expression of agonised entreaty. He
tore it in two, and threw it back at me across the table. The rest of
them rose in alarm, not knowing what might happen next. I instantly sat
down again in my corner. There had once been an occasion, under somewhat
similar circumstances, when Miss Jane Ann Stamper had been taken by the
two shoulders and turned out of a room. I waited, inspired by HER
spirit, for a repetition of HER martyrdom.

But no–it was not to be. His wife was the next person whom he addressed.
“Who–who–who,” he said, stammering with rage, “who asked this impudent
fanatic into the house? Did you?”

Before Aunt Ablewhite could say a word, Rachel answered for her.

“Miss Clack is here,” she said, “as my guest.”

Those words had a singular effect on Mr. Ablewhite. They suddenly
changed him from a man in a state of red-hot anger to a man in a state
of icy-cold contempt. It was plain to everybody that Rachel had said
something–short and plain as her answer had been–which gave him the
upper hand of her at last.

“Oh?” he said. “Miss Clack is here as YOUR guest–in MY house?”

It was Rachel’s turn to lose her temper at that. Her colour rose, and
her eyes brightened fiercely. She turned to the lawyer, and, pointing to
Mr. Ablewhite, asked haughtily, “What does he mean?”

Mr. Bruff interfered for the third time.

“You appear to forget,” he said, addressing Mr. Ablewhite, “that you
took this house as Miss Verinder’s guardian, for Miss Verinder’s use.”

“Not quite so fast,” interposed Mr. Ablewhite. “I have a last word to
say, which I should have said some time since, if this—-” He looked my
way, pondering what abominable name he should call me–“if this Rampant
Spinster had not interrupted us. I beg to inform you, sir, that, if my
son is not good enough to be Miss Verinder’s husband, I cannot presume
to consider his father good enough to be Miss Verinder’s guardian.
Understand, if you please, that I refuse to accept the position which is
offered to me by Lady Verinder’s will. In your legal phrase, I decline
to act. This house has necessarily been hired in my name. I take the
entire responsibility of it on my shoulders. It is my house. I can keep
it, or let it, just as I please. I have no wish to hurry Miss Verinder.
On the contrary, I beg her to remove her guest and her luggage, at her
own entire convenience.” He made a low bow, and walked out of the room.

That was Mr. Ablewhite’s revenge on Rachel, for refusing to marry his
son!

The instant the door closed, Aunt Ablewhite exhibited a phenomenon which
silenced us all. She became endowed with energy enough to cross the
room!

“My dear,” she said, taking Rachel by the hand, “I should be ashamed of
my husband, if I didn’t know that it is his temper which has spoken to
you, and not himself. You,” continued Aunt Ablewhite, turning on me in
my corner with another endowment of energy, in her looks this time
instead of her limbs–“you are the mischievous person who irritated him.
I hope I shall never see you or your tracts again.” She went back to
Rachel and kissed her. “I beg your pardon, my dear,” she said, “in my
husband’s name. What can I do for you?”

Consistently perverse in everything–capricious and unreasonable in all
the actions of her life–Rachel melted into tears at those commonplace
words, and returned her aunt’s kiss in silence.

“If I may be permitted to answer for Miss Verinder,” said Mr. Bruff,
“might I ask you, Mrs. Ablewhite, to send Penelope down with her
mistress’s bonnet and shawl. Leave us ten minutes together,” he added,
in a lower tone, “and you may rely on my setting matters right, to your
satisfaction as well as to Rachel’s.”

The trust of the family in this man was something wonderful to see.
Without a word more, on her side, Aunt Ablewhite left the room.

“Ah!” said Mr. Bruff, looking after her. “The Herncastle blood has its
drawbacks, I admit. But there IS something in good breeding after all!”

Having made that purely worldly remark, he looked hard at my corner, as
if he expected me to go. My interest in Rachel–an infinitely higher
interest than his–riveted me to my chair.

Mr. Bruff gave it up, exactly as he had given it up at Aunt Verinder’s,
in Montagu Square. He led Rachel to a chair by the window, and spoke to
her there.

“My dear young lady,” he said, “Mr. Ablewhite’s conduct has naturally
shocked you, and taken you by surprise. If it was worth while to contest
the question with such a man, we might soon show him that he is not to
have things all his own way. But it isn’t worth while. You were quite
right in what you said just now; he is beneath our notice.”

He stopped, and looked round at my corner. I sat there quite immovable,
with my tracts at my elbow and with Miss Jane Ann Stamper on my lap.

“You know,” he resumed, turning back again to Rachel, “that it was part
of your poor mother’s fine nature always to see the best of the people
about her, and never the worst. She named her brother-in-law your
guardian because she believed in him, and because she thought it would
please her sister. I had never liked Mr. Ablewhite myself, and I induced
your mother to let me insert a clause in the will, empowering her
executors, in certain events, to consult with me about the appointment
of a new guardian. One of those events has happened to-day; and I find
myself in a position to end all these dry business details, I hope
agreeably, with a message from my wife. Will you honour Mrs. Bruff by
becoming her guest? And will you remain under my roof, and be one of my
family, until we wise people have laid our heads together, and have
settled what is to be done next?”

At those words, I rose to interfere. Mr. Bruff had done exactly what I
had dreaded he would do, when he asked Mrs. Ablewhite for Rachel’s
bonnet and shawl.

Before I could interpose a word, Rachel had accepted his invitation in
the warmest terms. If I suffered the arrangement thus made between them
to be carried out–if she once passed the threshold of Mr. Bruff’s
door–farewell to the fondest hope of my life, the hope of bringing my
lost sheep back to the fold! The bare idea of such a calamity as this
quite overwhelmed me. I cast the miserable trammels of worldly
discretion to the winds, and spoke with the fervour that filled me, in
the words that came first.

“Stop!” I said–“stop! I must be heard. Mr. Bruff! you are not related
to her, and I am. I invite her–I summon the executors to appoint me
guardian. Rachel, dearest Rachel, I offer you my modest home; come to
London by the next train, love, and share it with me!”

Mr. Bruff said nothing. Rachel looked at me with a cruel astonishment
which she made no effort to conceal.

“You are very kind, Drusilla,” she said. “I shall hope to visit you
whenever I happen to be in London. But I have accepted Mr. Bruff’s
invitation, and I think it will be best, for the present, if I remain
under Mr. Bruff’s care.”

“Oh, don’t say so!” I pleaded. “I can’t part with you, Rachel–I can’t
part with you!”

I tried to fold her in my arms. But she drew back. My fervour did not
communicate itself; it only alarmed her.

“Surely,” she said, “this is a very unnecessary display of agitation? I
don’t understand it.”

“No more do I,” said Mr. Bruff.

Their hardness–their hideous, worldly hardness–revolted me.

“Oh, Rachel! Rachel!” I burst out. “Haven’t you seen yet, that my
heart yearns to make a Christian of you? Has no inner voice told you
that I am trying to do for you, what I was trying to do for your dear
mother when death snatched her out of my hands?”

Rachel advanced a step nearer, and looked at me very strangely.

“I don’t understand your reference to my mother,” she said. “Miss Clack,
will you have the goodness to explain yourself?”

Before I could answer, Mr. Bruff came forward, and offering his arm to
Rachel, tried to lead her out of the room.

“You had better not pursue the subject, my dear,” he said. “And Miss
Clack had better not explain herself.”

If I had been a stock or a stone, such an interference as this must have
roused me into testifying to the truth. I put Mr. Bruff aside
indignantly with my own hand, and, in solemn and suitable language, I
stated the view with which sound doctrine does not scruple to regard the
awful calamity of dying unprepared.

Rachel started back from me–I blush to write–with a scream of horror.

“Come away!” she said to Mr. Bruff. “Come away, for God’s sake, before
that woman can say any more! Oh, think of my poor mother’s harmless,
useful, beautiful life! You were at the funeral, Mr. Bruff; you saw how
everybody loved her; you saw the poor helpless people crying at her
grave over the loss of their best friend. And that wretch stands there,
and tries to make me doubt that my mother, who was an angel on earth, is
an angel in heaven now! Don’t stop to talk about it! Come away! It
stifles me to breathe the same air with her! It frightens me to feel
that we are in the same room together!”

Deaf to all remonstrance, she ran to the door.

At the same moment, her maid entered with her bonnet and shawl. She
huddled them on anyhow. “Pack my things,” she said, “and bring them to
Mr. Bruff’s.” I attempted to approach her–I was shocked and grieved,
but, it is needless to say, not offended. I only wished to say to her,
“May your hard heart be softened! I freely forgive you!” She pulled
down her veil, and tore her shawl away from my hand, and, hurrying out,
shut the door in my face. I bore the insult with my customary fortitude.
I remember it now with my customary superiority to all feeling of
offence.

Mr. Bruff had his parting word of mockery for me, before he too hurried
out, in his turn.

“You had better not have explained yourself, Miss Clack,” he said, and
bowed, and left the room.

The person with the cap-ribbons followed.

“It’s easy to see who has set them all by the ears together,” she said.
“I’m only a poor servant–but I declare I’m ashamed of you!” She too
went out, and banged the door after her.

I was left alone in the room. Reviled by them all, deserted by them all,
I was left alone in the room.

Is there more to be added to this plain statement of facts–to this
touching picture of a Christian persecuted by the world? No! my diary
reminds me that one more of the many chequered chapters in my life ends
here. From that day forth, I never saw Rachel Verinder again. She had my
forgiveness at the time when she insulted me. She has had my prayerful
good wishes ever since. And when I die–to complete the return on my part
of good for evil–she will have the LIFE, LETTERS, AND LABOURS OF MISS
JANE ANN STAMPER left her as a legacy by my will.
